PM_guidance_for_Energy_Projects
he objectives 
that constitute the specified goal may be in terms of time, costs, or technical 
results. A project can range from the very simple to the very complex. Due 
to its expanding utility and relevance, project management has emerged as 
a separate body of knowledge that is embraced by various disciplines rang- 
ing from engineering and business to social services. Project management 
techniques are widely used in many endeavors, including construction 
management, banking, manufacturing, engineering management, market- 
ing, health care delivery systems, transportation, research and development, 
defense, and public services. The application of project management is par- 
ticularly of high value in science, technology, and engineering undertakings, 
such as we have in the oil and gas industry. In today's fast-changing IT-based 
and competitive global market, every enterprise must strive to get ahead 
of the competition through effective project management in all facets of its 
operations. 

Project management represents an excellent basis for integrating various 
management techniques such as statistics, operations research, Six Sigma, 
computer simulation, and so on within the oil and gas industry operations. 
The purpose of this book is to present an integrated approach to project man- 
agement for oil and gas projects. The integrated approach covers the concepts, 
tools, and techniques (both new and tested) of project management. The ele- 
ments of the PMBOK provide a unifying platform for the topics covered in the 
book. The book is intended to serve as a reference book for planners, project 



xviii Preface 



operators, stakeholders, designers, project managers, business managers, 
consultants, project analysts, senior executives, project team members, mem- 
bers of project management office, project customers, functional managers, 
trainers, and researchers. It can also serve as a guidebook for technical con- 
sultants and as a textbook resource for students and educators. It is also useful 
as a supplementary reading for practicing engineers and as a handbook for 
field operators. It will appeal to petroleum industry professionals because of 
its focused treatment of oil and gas projects. 

The book also contains case examples of applications of project manage- 
ment tools and techniques to real-life project scenarios. These could serve as 
lessons learned for best practices in project management. 

Adedeji Badiru 
Samuel Osisanya 



Authors 



Adedeji B. Badiru is professor and head of Systems &amp; Engineering 
Management at the Air Force Institute of Technology. He was previously 
professor and department head of Industrial &amp; Information Engineering 
at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville. Prior to that, he was professor 
of industrial engineering and dean of University College at the University 
of Oklahoma. He is a registered professional engineer (PE), a certified proj- 
ect management professional (PMP), a fellow of the Institute of Industrial 
Engineers, and a fellow of the Nigerian Academy of Engineering. He holds 
a BS in industrial engineering, MS in mathematics, and MS in industrial 
engineering from Tennessee Technological University, and PhD in indus- 
trial engineering from the University of Central Florida. His areas of interest 
include mathematical modeling, project modeling and analysis, economic 
analysis, systems engineering, and efficiency/productivity analysis and 
improvement. He is the author of 22 books, 34 book chapters, 65 technical 
journal articles, 107 conference proceedings and presentations. He also has 
24 magazine articles and 20 editorials and periodicals. He is a member of sev- 
eral professional associations of several scholastic honor societies. Professor 
Badiru has won several awards for his teaching, research, and professional 
accomplishments. He is the recipient of the 2009 Dayton Affiliate Society 
Council Award for Outstanding Scientists and Engineers in the Education 
category with a commendation from the 128th Senate of Ohio. He also won 
2010 IIE/Joint Publishers Book-of-the-Year Award for coediting The Handbook 
of Military Industrial Engineering (CRC Press, 2009). He also won 2010 ASEE 
John Imhoff Award for his global contributions to industrial engineering 
education, the 2011 Federal Employee of the Year Award in the Managerial 
Category from the International Public Management Association, Wright 
Patterson Air Force Base, the 2012 Distinguished Engineering Alum Award 
from the University of Central Florida, and the 2012 Medallion Award 
from the Institute of Industrial Engineers for his global contributions in 
the advancement of the profession. He has served as a consultant to sev- 
eral organizations around the world including Russia, Mexico, Taiwan, 
Nigeria, and Ghana. He has conducted customized training workshops for 
numerous organizations including Sony, AT&amp;T, Seagate Technology, U.S. Air 
Force, Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric, Oklahoma Asphalt Pavement Association, 
Hitachi, Nigeria National Petroleum Corporation, and ExxonMobil. He has 
won several awards for his teaching, research, publications, administra- 
tion, and professional accomplishments. He holds a leadership certificate 
from the University of Tennessee Leadership Institute. Professor Badiru has 
served as a technical project reviewer, curriculum reviewer, and proposal 
reviewer for several organizations including The Third-World Network 



xx Authors 



of Scientific Organizations, Italy, National Science Foundation, National 
Research Council, and the American Council on Education. He is on the edi- 
torial and review boards of several technical journals and book publishers. 
Professor Badiru has also served as an industrial development consultant to 
the United Nations Development Program. He is also a program evaluator 
for ABET. In 2011, Professor Badiru led a research team to develop analytical 
models for Systems Engineering Efficiency Research (SEER) for the Air Force 
acquisitions integration office at the Pentagon. Professor Badiru has diverse 
areas of avocation. His professional accomplishments are coupled with his 
passion for writing about everyday events, interpersonal issues, and socially 
responsible service to the community. Outside of the academic realm, he 
writes self-help books, motivational poems, editorials, and newspaper com- 
mentaries, as well as engaging in paintings and crafts. 

Samuel O. Osisanya is a professor in the Mewbourne School of Petroleum 
and Geological Engineering at the University of Oklahoma in Norman, 
Oklahoma, where he teaches drilling engineering, well completion and 
stimulation, production and reservoir engineering, horizontal well technol- 
ogy, and emerging technologies. The students selected him as the 1994, 2002, 
and 2004 outstanding professor of the year and the 2006-2007 Most Inspiring 
Faculty of the Student Athletes of University of Oklahoma. Formerly, 
Dr. Osisanya was an assistant professor at Montana Tech University, where he 
taught nodal analysis and surface production operations; visiting lecturer at 
the University of Ibadan, Nigeria from 1980 to 1983. He was a graduate teach- 
ing assistant at the University of Texas at Austin from 1986 to 1991, where he 
won UT College of Engineering 1989-1990 Engineering Foundation TA/AI 
Award for Meritorious Service in Engineering Teaching. Dr. Osisanya has 
8 years of industrial experience with Dresser Magcobar, Gulf (now Chevron), 
Shell-BP, and ExxonMobil, where he worked as an engineer in various cat- 
egories and rose to the level of a drilling foreman. Dr. Osisanya's technical 
interests include wellbore stability in shale formations, drilling optimiza- 
tion, cementing, well completion, and production engineering. National 
Science Foundation (NSF) Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) 
award Winner in 1995 ($325,000). In 2000, Dr. Osisanya was selected by the 
United States National Science Foundation (NSF) as one of more than 250 NSF 
award winning scientists, engineers, and Nobel prize winners in the United 
States to visit middle school students, as part of the NSF 50th Anniversary 
celebration. He has authored and coauthored more than 84 technical papers 
in Society of Petroleum Engineers (SPE), Journal of Canadian Petroleum Technology 
(JCPT), American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), other journals, and 
numerous reports. He was a member of the SPE Well Completion Technical 
Committee (1997-1999) and faculty advisor to the University of Oklahoma 
SPE Student Chapter (1995-1999). He was a member on the SPE Committee 
on Drilling Design and Management from 2003 to 2006. He is listed in Who's 
Who Among America's Teachers (1996). He is selected as SPE Distinguished 



Authors xxi 



Lecturer for 2011-2012 program. He holds a BS (Summa Cum Laude) from 
University of Ibadan, Nigeria, MS and PhD from the University of Texas at 
Austin all in Petroleum Engineering. He is a registered professional engineer 
in Texas and a member of SPE of AIME, American Association of Drilling 
Engineers (AADE), and American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE). 
Dr. Osisanya has taught several in-house short courses for several countries 
and organizations, including ExxonMobil in Nigeria, Nigerian National 
Petroleum Corporation, Halliburton in the United States and Nigeria, and 
Qatar General Petroleum Corporation, Sonatrach of Algeria, PDVSA of 
Venezuela, Pertamina National Oil Company of Indonesia, AGIP of Italy, 
Sidanco &amp; Sibnef t Oil Companies of Russia, Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, 
TNK-BP Russia, VietSovPetro, Next-Schlumberger, Seminarium of Ecuador, 
Total of Nigeria, Chevron of Nigeria, Saudi Aramco of Saudi Arabia, 
UNIStrategic of Singapore, PetroGroup of Colombia, ZADCO of Abu-Dhabi, 
Repsol of Spain, Petrom of Romania, PEMEX of Mexico, and Vankoneft of 
Russia. 



1 



World Systems Framework for Oil 
and Gas Industry 

A systems view of the world is what is required to keep industry well oiled. 

Energy is critical to the success and advancement of the society. Energy sup- 
ply is needed for heating, cooling, and lighting our homes, business, and 
industry. Modern communication facilities in the society function only 
when consistent energy supply is assured. Since all our modern commercial 
activities are highly interlinked, we must view the whole as a system of sys- 
tems (SoS) of economic activities. Lorincz (2008) reminded us that the "thirst 
for oil and gas won't be satisfied any time soon." This is a sentiment that is 
shared by most people both within and outside the oil and gas industry. It is 
forecasted that the need to find replacement supplies of oil and gas to match 
the global demand for energy will continue to encourage massive capital 
spending in the industry around the world. Much of such investments will 
be directed at executing multinational projects. Based on the rapid growth of 
the economies of China and India, the long-term outlook for the oil and gas 
industry is quite positive. We just have to ensure that projects are planned, 
organized, controlled, and executed constructively through global alliances. 
The international market price of crude oil is the most crucial factor deter- 
mining the consumer-level price for petroleum-based products. This means 
that the price of gasoline at the pump is mainly determined by the world- 
wide demand for and supply of crude oil. According to estimates from the 
International Energy Agency (IEA),* the world's primary energy needs are 
expected to grow by 55% between 2005 and 2030, with the demand reach- 
ing 17.7 billion tonnes of oil equivalent, compared with 11.4 billion tonnes 
in 2005. The current market of 2012-2013 is already experiencing being on 
pace with that demand curve. The challenges that oil and gas projects will 
continue to face fall in the following categories: 

• Technical challenges 

• Managerial challenges 

• Human resource challenges 

Rigorous and disciplined applications of project management tools and 
techniques can help mitigate these challenges. 



http://www.iea.org/stats/index.asp; accessed April 30, 2012. 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



A Multitiered Systems View 

It is a systems world. To be successful, all industries must consider a systems 
view of their options. This is particularly most critical for the oil and gas 
industry, where many multifaceted factors are interlinked. If you do not think 
that everything is globally connected, consider this fact: A Boeing 747-400 has 
six million parts (half of which are fasteners) made in 33 different countries. 

This shows that the fates of industries are interconnected throughout the 
entire world in terms of production and consumption activities, particularly 
in the oil and gas sector (Badiru, 2009). This makes it mandatory that we take 
a systems view of the world when dealing with oil and gas projects. With 
one-third of the electricity produced on Earth being used to power electric 
light bulbs, we must all work together to pursue more efficient practices. The 
first quarter of 2012 saw a significant rise in global crude oil prices. After 
closing 2011 at $108 per barrel, Brent spot prices exceeded $125 per barrel 
by early March, from whence it traded within a relatively narrow range for 
the remainder of the month. This price increase reflected changes in global 
oil supplies, as significant unplanned disruptions in production from coun- 
tries that are not members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) countered the recovery in Libyan production. Project 
management must address these types of developments in day-to-day opera- 
tions in the oil and gas industry. According to an assessment by the U.S. 
Geological Survey (USGS),* excluding the United States, the world holds an 
estimated 565 billion barrels (bbo) of undiscovered, technically recoverable 
conventional oil; 5606 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of undiscovered, technically 
recoverable conventional natural gas; and 167 bbo of undiscovered, techni- 
cally recoverable natural gas liquids (NGL). The report includes mean esti- 
mates of undiscovered but technically recoverable conventional oil and gas 
resources in 171 geologic provinces of the world. These estimates include 
resources beneath both onshore and offshore areas. All these numbers repre- 
sent technically recoverable oil and gas resources, which are those quantities 
of oil and gas producible using currently available technological and indus- 
trial practices, regardless of economic or accessibility considerations. This 
assessment does not include reserves — accumulations of oil or gas that have 
been discovered, are well defined, and are considered economically viable. 
To tap into the proven and estimated oil and gas reserves, many countries 
must come together in systems-based synergistic national alliances. A sys- 
tems view of the energy world is, thus, required. 

This book uses the project framework view from the field of industrial and 
systems engineering in consonance with the fundamentals of petroleum 
engineering. Industrial engineering deals with the design and development 
of integrated systems of people, machines, and information resources for producing 



http://www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/USGS; released April 18, 2012. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 



products and services. This is precisely what happens in the oil and gas indus- 
try because of the multifaceted requirements of the industry. Apart from the 
nuclear projects, no other projects generate as much environmental senti- 
ments as projects in the oil and gas industry. Thus, formal project manage- 
ment should be an essential part of planning, organizing, scheduling, and 
controlling projects in the industry. Those who support or oppose oil and gas 
projects are often uninformed about the merits and demerits of the projects. 
The techniques of project management can help mitigate such awareness 
problems. There is a correlation between the application of project manage- 
ment and better business performance. For this reason, a framework based 
on an SoS modeling is very essential for the oil and gas industry. There are 
three closely linked global challenges: 

1. Increasing energy demand 

2. Environmental and climate change 

3. National and global security 

Attendant with these challenges are the related concerns of science and 
technology developments, management of research and development, and 
global economic advancement. The major activities of an oil and gas com- 
pany revolve around the following elements: 

• Exploration 

• Drilling and production 

• Transportation 

• Refining 

• Marketing 

Each of these requires a formal and rigorous application of project man- 
agement. For example, exploratory drilling does the following: 

• Establishes that hydrocarbons exist 

• Determines the quality; oil and gas ratio 

• Establishes the extent of the reservoir 

• Conducts an economic value of the resource 

• Designs a development plan; how the reservoir is to be developed 
for maximum recovery 

Drilling and production require project management for 

• Designing platform 

• Substructure, top side facilities 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Fabrication 

• Installation 

• Drilling (early production) 

• Environmental issues 

• Production (separate oil, gas, and water) 

• Transportation 

• Pipelines 

• Off load directly onto tankers 

Drilling economics focuses on 

• Optimum drilling practices 

• Cost per foot 

• Break-even curve 

Multinational projects particularly pose unique challenges pertaining to 
reliable power supply, efficient communication systems, credible govern- 
ment support, dependable procurement processes, consistent availability of 
technology, progressive industrial climate, trustworthy risk mitigation infra- 
structure, regular supply of skilled labor, uniform focus on quality of work, 
global consciousness, hassle-free bureaucratic processes, coherent safety and 
security system, steady law and order, unflinching focus on customer sat- 
isfaction, and fair labor relations. Assessing and resolving concerns about 
these issues in a step-by-step fashion will create a foundation of success for a 
large project. While no system can be perfect and satisfactory in all aspects, 
a tolerable trade-off on the factors is essential for project success. Figure 1.1 



r 



Oil and gas business process 



Customer 
requirements 



Quality goals 



Production 
capabilities 




Management partnership 

Technical partnership 

Integration of competencies 



Schedule 






Enhanced project delivery 



FIGURE 1.1 

The oil and gas business process. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 



World energy 
production, 2003 

(Renewables. 1.4% 

J Hydroelectric, 6.5% 

| Nuclear, 6.5% 

1 Natural 

| Coal, 2: 






By 2050: 

• World population will 
increase from 6.5 to 9.2 
billion 

• World energy demand 
will nearly double, 
from 422 to 826 quads 










gas, 

.9% 


23.7% 










| Oil, 


38.0% 


0% 10% 20% 30% 




40% 


50% 



FIGURE 1.2 

World energy production and projection of demand. 

shows an illustration of the oil and gas business environment and the typical 
factors impinging upon the industry. 

Figure 1.2 shows the projection of energy demands as the world popula- 
tion grows. The statistics show that oil and gas constitute a major portion of 
the world's energy production. The increasing demand for energy has led to 
furious searches for alternate sources as well as intensification of the exploi- 
tation of the existing sources. Figure 1.3 suggests using current technology 



Equivalent of 1000 
conventional 500-MW 
coal-fired power plants 



1 000 "zero-emission" 500- 
MW coal plants 
500 1-GW nuclear plants 
Renewable generation: 

- Wind: 50 x current 

- Solar: 1000 x current 



Biomass fuels 
from plantations 



Convert 30 million 
acres of barren 
area to biomass 
crop production 



Efficiency 



Replace 1 billion 
20-mile/gallon 
vehicles with new 
40-mile/gallon 
vehicles 



C0 2 storage Geologic carbon 
in new forests sequestration 



Turn 60 million 
acres of barren 
land into forest 



Install 3700 
sequestration 
sites similar to 
Norway's Sliepner 
oil field project 



E « 



o o 
o g 



2005 



2035 



2065 



2095 




FIGURE 1.3 

Using current technology to mitigate climate change due to carbon emission. 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



12,500 




Renewables 



Coal 



Hydroelectricity 
Nuclear 



Natural gas 



1965 



1974 



1983 



1992 



2001 



2010 



FIGURE 1.4 

World energy consumption as of 2010 in millions of tons of oil equivalent. (Based on data from 
BP Statistical Review of World Energy, 2011.) 

to mitigate the climate change problems. Fortunately, the dire energy situ- 
ation often creates new innovation and creativity that can facilitate a rapid 
convergence of technological, political, economic, and managerial processes. 
Figure 1.4 shows the distribution of world energy consumption by sources as 
of 2010 in millions of tons of oil equivalent. As in the case of production, the 
data show that the oil and gas industry is a major responder to world energy 
demands. 



Some Case Examples 



Some case examples of the world system of the oil and gas industry are pre- 
sented here. Figure 1.5 shows a typical small-scale "pecking" oil well on a 
private land in Oklahoma. 

As the world's known oil and gas reserves are running out, the hunt 
for more is on, even in more remote places on Earth. One such area is the 
Barents Sea, off the northernmost tip of Norway and neighboring Russia. 
Both Norwegian and Russian authorities say that the potential for future 
fossil energy exploration in this region is quite enormous. Meanwhile, 
environmentalists warn of the danger to the fragile Arctic environment. 
Norway's StatoilHydro had won the right to join in developing the vast 
Shtokman gas field. This ended the long uncertainty over one of the world's 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 








FIGURE 1.5 

Private small-scale "pecking" oil well on private land in Oklahoma. 



largest untapped deposits of oil and gas. Technical challenges abound in 
many of the exploration fields because they often exhibit diverse topo- 
graphical, geographical, geological, and environmental properties with far- 
reaching social implications. For this reason, no oil and gas project can be 
undertaken in isolation. World system considerations must be brought to 
bear on all projects, using SoS approaches. The lessons learned from Arctic 
and subarctic operations can serve as starting templates for other projects 
around the world. 

A large sinkhole that formed in south Texas's oil and gas region in 2008 is 
an example of the interrelationships of several factors dealing with human 
issues, technology availability, and economic development. The incident 
renewed questions about the effects of enormous volumes of barrels of 
saltwater injected into the ground each year as a by-product of oil and gas 
drilling. High energy prices have led to a surge in drilling across Texas and 
other states, much of it in older oil fields that tend to produce large volumes 
of saltwater along with crude oil. Meanwhile, new technologies for produc- 
ing natural gas use millions of gallons of water to crack open gas-bearing 
rocks — yielding contaminated water that must then be disposed of, usu- 
ally underground. This process, called tracking (hydraulic fracturing), has 
generated a lot of debate and concerns in many communities. Most notable 
in recent times is the case of tracking in Ohio. Hydraulic fracturing, known 
as tracking for short, involves injecting water, sand, and chemicals deep 
into the ground at high pressure to crack the shale and allow the oil or 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



gas to flow out and be tapped. Some of the opponents of tracking claim 
that tracking is responsible for the frequent wave of earthquakes in the 
region. As a part of the overall project development, the full human and 
environmental impacts of tracking must be assessed. But at the same time, 
the economic development impacts must be recognized and factored into 
a multiattribute analysis. As energy companies snap up leasing rights in 
Wayne County (Ohio), some residents are optimistic, but environmental- 
ists are worried. Only a full open-access analysis can allay the fears of all 
stakeholders. 

In 2006, the Texas oil and gas industry injected 6.7 bbo of liquid, mostly 
water, beneath the ground, and experts say that the amount has been ris- 
ing as new wells have multiplied and old wells are revived. Federal regu- 
lators, environmentalists, and community groups worry that lax oversight 
is allowing some of the water — which can be 10 times as salty as seawa- 
ter and often contains oil, heavy metals, and even radioactive material — to 
escape from underground reservoirs. That could lead to the contamination 
of underground drinking water supplies, the pollution of soil and surface 
water, and more sinkholes as underground structures are eroded. Critics 
have argued that project oversights are lax or nonexistent. A comprehensive 
systems project management approach centered on communication, coop- 
eration, and coordination may defuse many of the pending issues. Figure 
1.6 emphasizes the interrelated challenges of energy generation, transmis- 
sion, distribution, and consumption. Figure 1.7 shows an example of natural 
gas flaring, a practice common in some parts of gas-producing developing 
countries. Figure 1.8 illustrates the mega-sized structures and investments 
associated with energy ventures. 



Fossil 

Fission 

Renewables 

Fusion 




Transmission 
technology 

Hydrogen 

Distributed 
energy resour 



Buildings 

Industry 

Transportation 




FIGURE 1.6 

Interrelationships of energy generation, transmission, distribution, and consumption. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 




FIGURE 1.7 

Natural gas flaring in a developing country. 




FIGURE 1.8 

Mega structures of oil and gas investments. 



10 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Energy Costs 

According to a report by Pound (2010), in the United States, a state's energy 
portfolio can play a significant role in determining electricity prices. 
Figure 1.9 illustrates the three key factors that determine energy prices. 
These U.S. averages vary by region and market, depending on the age of the 
infrastructure and the fuel mix. Some of the least-expensive electricity is 
generated by existing coal and nuclear plants. Nonetheless, the cost of elec- 
tricity from new power plants of any type is significantly higher until capital 
costs are recovered. When a state builds new power plants, it is likely to raise 
rates, regardless of the technology 

High prices encourage natural gas companies to focus on oil drilling. 
With oil prices above $100, even the most natural-gas-focused companies 
are increasing their oil drilling in the United States as a way to diversify. 
In recent years, US. energy companies have concentrated most of their 
domestic production efforts on natural gas as the biggest, easiest-to-get 
deposits of domestic crude oil are depleted. Some companies have intensi- 
fied drilling for oil in Colorado and Texas, including in the Barnett Shale, 
which has a vast hydrocarbon reserve that had previously been known 
primarily for gas, not oil. The prices of both commodities have escalated 
drastically since the beginning of the year. However, the rise for oil has 
been steadier than that of gas in recent years. This is because natural 
gas is more difficult to transport and store. It is also more prone to sea- 
sonal fluctuations. Reports indicate that more than 80% of approximately 
1,800 drilling rigs working in the United States in early 2012 were going 
after gas. Reports also indicate that the number of oil rigs working in the 




FIGURE 1.9 

Major components of U.S. electricity prices (cents per kWh and share of total). (Based on data 
from U.S. Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook, 2010.) 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 11 



United States was up 28% from 2011 to 2012 while gas-focused drilling 
rose by 1.4% over the same period. The Marcellus Shale, a layer of rock that 
stretches from upstate New York to eastern Ohio and as far south as West 
Virginia, may be a major source of natural gas in the future. The Marcellus 
Shale has been known for more than a century to contain gas, but it was 
generally not seen as economical to tap. Recent improvements in recovery 
technology, sharply higher natural gas prices, and strong drilling results 
in a similar shale formation in north Texas are changing the playing field 
of oil and gas exploration. It has been confirmed that parts of the country 
where energy supplies were long thought to be largely depleted are sud- 
denly finding a new lease on exploration life cycle. The oil and gas indus- 
try is already aggressively buying mineral rights in Pennsylvania, where 
the Marcellus Shale appears to be thickest. It is estimated that more than 
20 oil and gas companies will invest $700 million in 2012 in developing 
the Marcellus Shale. This bodes well for the application of systems-based 
project management tools and techniques. Another confirmation of the 
interconnectedness of markets is the 2012 report linking the sharp rise in 
the sale of pickup trucks to the increased activities in oil and gas explora- 
tions. Apparently, the caliber of those working or seeking employment 
in the oil and gas industry is in alignment with those who drive pickup 
trucks. The most likely type of vehicle to be spotted in the parking lot of 
oil and gas companies are pickup trucks, which is coveted in that industry 
for their rugged dependability. 



Education and Workforce Development Issues 

There is no other industry that is so global and aggressive in educational 
programs and workforce development as the oil and gas industry. The indus- 
try itself is large with operational tentacles reaching all parts of the world. 
The most aggressive nations pursuing oil and gas education and workforce 
development are the developing nations with newly discovered reserves. 
The resource-rich developing nations produce more oil and gas graduates 
than the United States and Europe. This large and steady supply of petro- 
leum graduates from the developing nations is helping to mitigate the over- 
all shortage of technical workforce for the industry. The nations are, thus, 
chipping away at the educational advantage typically held by Western coun- 
tries. Traditionally, the top U.S. schools such as the University of Oklahoma 
and Texas A&amp;M had provided most of the world's petroleum graduates. But 
in recent years, Brazil, Argentina, Nigeria, and other nations are making dra- 
matic inroads into the production of petroleum graduates. While many of the 
new graduates are employed by Western oil and gas companies, many are 
also joining their nation-based companies. A key part of the education and 



12 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



skills of these foreign nationals should include training in the management 
fields, particularly project management, to buttress their technical assets. 
The educational infrastructure should be viewed and managed as a part of 
the overall world system of the oil and gas industry. 



System of Systems Framework 

This book advocates using an SoS framework so that all factors of impor- 
tance can be included in the overall design and execution of projects in the 
oil and gas industry. 



What Is a System? 

A system is a collection of interrelated elements working together synergis- 
tically to achieve a set of objectives. The composite output of a system is 
greater than the sum of the individual outputs of its components. A sys- 
tems view of a process facilitates a comprehensive inclusion of all the factors 
involved in the process. 



What Is System of Systems? 

SoS engineering is an interdisciplinary approach focusing on the synergistic 
integration of the elements making up a composite complex system, which is 
made up of other systems. Each subsystem of an SoS is a complete system in 
its own right. Some of the elements of an SoS include 

• Self-regulation 

• Self-adjustment 

• Self-resolution 

• Environmental sensitivity (i.e., interaction with prevailing operating 
conditions) 

• Consolidation of capabilities 

• Coordinated input-process-output relationships 

• Structural interfaces between the systems within the SoS 

• Composite equilibrium of the systems making up the SoS 

• Value trading and transfers between the systems in the overall SoS 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 13 



SoS facilitates an appreciation of what each system brings to the table in the 
overall assessment of the value created by the SoS. The oil and gas industry 
as an SoS, will encompass such elements as the market system, the social sys- 
tem, the environmental system, the national development system, the national 
security system, the economic system, the regulatory system, the legislative 
system, the financial services system, and so on. Each of these examples is, 
itself, composed of smaller systems. Taking a world systems view of the oil 
and gas industry ensures that we appreciate all the components and factors 
that can impinge upon the success or failure of the industry. An SoS approach 
transforms the individual capabilities of the system entities into a collective 
capability to meet specific requirements as summarized below: 

• Systems that are individually developed, managed, and operated 
function as autonomous components of one or more SoS. 

• All systems within an SoS provide appropriate functional capabili- 
ties to each of the other elements in the SoS. 

• The development and management of an SoS explicitly consider the 
political, financial, legal, technical, social, organizational, and opera- 
tional characteristics of each element in the SoS. 

• SoS recognizes and embraces the larger pool of stakeholders that 
results from bringing several systems together. 

• SoS can accommodate changes to its conceptual, functional, physi- 
cal, and spatial operating boundaries without negative impacts on 
its managerial processes. 

• SoS exhibits a collective behavior representing dynamic interactions 
with the operating environment so that it can adapt and respond to 
meet or exceed requirements. 



What Is a Project System? 

Any project is essentially a collection of interrelated activities, people, tech- 
nology, resources, work processes, and other assets brought together in the 
pursuit of a common goal. The goal may be in terms of generating one of the 
following: 

1. Physical product (e.g., producing a maintenance spanner or a drill 
bit for oil and gas) 

2. Service (e.g., providing accounting templates for oil and gas business) 

3. Result (e.g., achieving a desired profit margin or meeting oil and gas 
production schedule) 



14 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 




FIGURE 1.10 

World systems view of the oil and gas industry. 

Thus, a systems project management can be defined as follows: 
Systems project management for the oil and gas industry is the process of 
using a systems approach to manage, allocate, and time resources to achieve 
enterprise-wide goals in an efficient and expeditious manner, considering all 
global ramifications. 

Figure 1.10 illustrates a world systems view of the several factors and rami- 
fications that affect the oil and gas industry. The most common basis for 
implementing an SoS view is the application of systems engineering. 



What Is Systems Engineering? 

Systems engineering is the application of engineering to solutions of a mul- 
tifaceted problem through a systematic collection and integration of parts 
of the problem with respect to the life cycle of the problem. It is the branch 
of engineering concerned with the development, implementation, and use of 
large or complex systems. It focuses on specific goals of a system considering 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 15 



the specifications, prevailing constraints, expected services, possible behav- 
iors, and structure of the system. It also involves a consideration of the activi- 
ties required to assure that the system's performance matches the stated 
goals. Systems engineering addresses the integration of tools, people, and 
processes required to achieve a cost-effective and timely operation of the 
system. 



Embracing Project Management 

The rapid evolution of technology and environmental sensitivity in a 
dynamic global market creates increasing challenges for those who plan 
and execute oil and gas projects. Thus, project management tools and 
techniques are essential in the overall scheme of an oil and gas business. 
A coordinated application of systems engineering and project manage- 
ment can help increase the bottom line of the oil and gas industry. Systems 
engineering helps to identify an inclusive framework under which all 
the components would work together. Project management provides 
the mechanisms through which specific work and objectives within the 
framework would be accomplished. The following project definitions are 
essential: 

Project: A project is traditionally defined as a unique one-of-kind endeavor 
with a specific goal that has a definite beginning and a definite end. The 
Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK®) defines a project as a 
temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or 
result. Temporary means having a defined beginning and a definite end. 
The term "unique" implies that the project is different from other projects in 
terms of characteristics. 

Project management: Badiru (2012) defines project management as the pro- 
cess of managing, allocating, and timing resources to achieve a given goal in 
an efficient and expeditious manner. 

PMBOK defines project management as the application of knowledge, 
skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to achieve project objectives. 

Identification of stakeholders: Stakeholders are individuals or organiza- 
tions whose interests may be positively or negatively impacted by a proj- 
ect. Stakeholders must be identified by the project team for every project. 
A common deficiency in this requirement is that employees of the proj- 
ect organization are often ignored, neglected, or taken for granted during 
the identification of stakeholders. As the definition of stakeholders clearly 
suggests, if the interests of the employees can be positively or negatively 
affected by a project, then the employees must be viewed as stakeholders. 
For the oil and gas industry, in particular, the local community that can 
be impacted one way or the other should be included in the list of project 



16 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



stakeholders. A failure to do this adequately is the source of the global 
angst between energy-related industries and local communities around the 
world. For a successful overall outcome of a project, the local community 
should be considered as vital as the production staff of the oil and gas 
industry. A list of stakeholders in an oil and gas project may include all of 
the following: 



Customers 

Project owner 

Project sponsor 

Project operator 

Project financier 

Contractors and subcontractors 

Associated companies 

Local communities 

Project manager 

Project teams 

Industry shareholders 



Figure 1.11 shows a hierarchical structure and interrelationships of some 
of the factors involved in the development of an oil and gas project. With 
an estimated $22 trillion of investment in supply infrastructure in the com- 
ing years, there will be recurring opportunities to apply the tools and tech- 
niques of project management. 




Machinery Human Materials Financing Reliability Changes 





□ □□□ 



FIGURE 1.11 

Hierarchical structure of factors in oil and gas project development. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 17 



The Gasoline Pump System 

Since project management is found everywhere, all project participants will 
find the systems approach to be very beneficial. A good example of a sys- 
tems design that we are all familiar with is the gas pump. Have you ever 
considered all the factors and requirements that go into the operation of a 
gas pump? The pump must exhibit a high level of reliability, dependability, 
and durability as it operates in a wide range of operating conditions, includ- 
ing extreme cold in winter and extremely high temperatures in the sum- 
mer. For the pump to operate just right, all factors must interface perfectly 
as expected. The operation of that pump, as we have all come to expect, is 
similar to how a good project is supposed to operate. 



Quantitative Systems Modeling 

Classical control system focuses on control of the dynamics of mechanical 
objects, such as a pump, electrical motor, turbine, rotating wheel, and so on. 
The mathematical basis for such control systems can be adapted (albeit in 
iconical formats) for organizational management systems, including project 
management. This is because both technical and managerial systems are 
characterized by inputs, variables, processing, control, feedback, and output. 
This is represented graphically by input-process-output relationship block 
diagrams. Mathematically, it can be represented as 

z=f(x) + e, (1.1) 

where 
z = output 

/(.) = functional relationship 
8 = error component (noise, disturbance, etc.) 

For systems-based multivariable cases, the mathematical expression is rep- 
resented as vector-matrix functions as shown below: 

Z = f(X) + E, (1.2) 

where each term is a matrix. Z is the output vector, f(.) is the input vec- 
tor, and E is the error vector. Regardless of the level or form of mathemat- 
ics used, all systems exhibit the same input-process-output characteristics, 
either quantitatively or qualitatively. The premise of this book is that there 
should be a cohesive coupling of quantitative and qualitative approaches in 



18 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



managing a project system. In fact, it is this unique blending of approaches 
that makes systems application for project management more robust than 
what one will find in mechanical control systems, where the focus is primar- 
ily on quantitative representations. 



Cost-Schedule-Quality Constraints 

Systems management is the pursuit of organizational goals within the con- 
straints of time, cost, and quality expectations. The iron triangle model 
depicted in Figure 1.12 shows that project accomplishments are constrained 
by the boundaries of quality, schedule, and cost. In this case, quality repre- 
sents the composite collection of project requirements. In a situation where 
precise optimization is not possible, there will need to be trade-offs between 
these three factors of success. The concept of iron triangle is that a rigid tri- 
angle of constraints encases the project. Everything must be accomplished 
within the boundaries of schedule (time), cost (budget), and quality (per- 
formance requirements). If better quality is expected, a compromise along 
the axes of time and cost must be executed, thereby altering the shape of the 
triangle. The trade-off relationships are not linear and must be visualized in 
a multidimensional context. This is better articulated by a 3-D view of the 
system constraints as shown in the box. Scope requirements determine the 
project boundary and trade-offs must be done within that boundary. If we 



Iron triangle 




Quality 



FIGURE 1.12 

Project system constraints of cost, schedule, and quality. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 19 



label the eight corners of the box as (a), (b), (c), . . ., (h), we can iteratively 
assess the best operating point for the project. For example, we can address 
the following two operational questions: 

1. From the point of view of the project sponsor, which corner is the 
most desired operating point in terms of a combination of require- 
ments, time, and cost? 

2. From the point of view of the project executor, which corner is the 
most desired operating point in terms of a combination of require- 
ments, time, and cost? 

Note that all the corners represent extreme operating points. We notice 
that point (e) is the do-nothing state, where there are no requirements, 
no time allocation, and no cost incurrence. This cannot be the desired 
operating state of any organization that seeks to remain productive. Point 
(a) represents an extreme case of meeting all the requirements with no 
investment of time or cost allocation. This is an unrealistic extreme in any 
practical environment. It represents a case of getting something for noth- 
ing. Yet, it is the most desired operating point for the project sponsor. By 
comparison, point (c) provides the maximum possible for requirements, 
cost, and time. In other words, the highest levels of requirements can be 
met if the maximum possible time is allowed and the highest possible 
budget is allocated. This is an unrealistic expectation in any resource- 
conscious organization. You cannot get everything you ask for to execute 
a project. Yet, it is the most desired operating point for the project execu- 
tor. Considering the two extreme points of (a) and (c), it is obvious that 
the project must be executed within some compromise region within the 
scope boundary. 



System of Systems Value Modeling 

A technique that can be used to assess the overall value-added components 
of a process improvement program is the systems value model (SVM), which 
is an adaptation of the manufacturing system value (MSV) model presented 
by Troxler and Blank (1989). The model provides an analytical decision aid 
for comparing process alternatives. Value is represented as a p-dimensional 
vector: 

V=f(A x ,A 2 A) (1.3) 

where A = (A v . . ., A„) is a vector of quantitative measures of tangible and 
intangible attributes. Examples of process attributes are quality, throughput, 



20 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



capability, productivity, cost, and schedule. Attributes are considered to be a 
combined function of factors, x v expressed as 



ink 

A k [X\,x 2 , ...,x,„ k ) = y ji\Xj) 



(1.4) 



where {x t } is a set of m factors associated with attribute A k (k = 1,2, . . ., p) and 
fi is a contribution function of factor x, to attribute A k . Examples of factors 
include reliability, flexibility, user acceptance, capacity utilization, safety, 
and design functionality. Factors are themselves considered to be composed 
of indicators, c„ expressed as 



X,(v u V 2/ ... / V„)= ^Zj{Vj) 



(1.5) 



where {v.) is a set of n indicators associated with factor x, (i = 1,2, . . ., m) and z ; 
is a scaling function for each indicator variable v&gt;. Examples of indicators are 
project responsiveness, lead time, learning curve, and work rejects. By com- 
bining the above definitions, a composite measure of the value of a process 
can be modeled as 

V = f(A 1 ,A 2 A p ) 



f 



(1.6) 

where m and n may assume different values for each attribute. A subjective 
measure to indicate the utility of the decision maker may be included in the 
model by using an attribute-weighting factor, w p to obtain a weighted PV: 



mi 


( n \ 




mj 


( n \ 




mk 


f n \ 




X/&lt; 


^ Z i( V j) 


/ 


Ifi 


X 2 '^) 


, . . . , 


If' 


^ Z i( V i) 




! = 1 


V H ) 


-1 


;=i 


V H ) 


-2 


;=i 


V -'=! ) 


V , 



PV W =f(w 1 A y w 2 A 2 , . . ., w p A) 



(1.7) 



where 



^w k = l, (0&lt;iv k &lt;l) 



(1.8) 



With this modeling approach, a set of process options can be compared on 
the basis of a set of attributes and factors. This quantitative approach fits the 
SoS approach perfectly. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 21 



Example of System Value Modeling 

To illustrate the above modeling approach, suppose three information tech- 
nology (IT) options are to be evaluated based on four attribute elements, 
capability, suitability, performance, and productivity, as shown in Table 1.1. 

For this example, based on Equations 1.1 and 1.4, the value vector is defined 
as 

V =/(capability suitability, performance, productivity) (1.9) 

Capability: "Capability" refers to the ability of a particular IT technology 
to satisfy multiple requirements. For example, a certain IT equipment may 
only provide computational service. A different piece of equipment may be 
capable of generating reports in addition to computational analysis, thus 
increasing the service variety that can be obtained. The levels of increase in 
service variety from the three competing equipment types are 38%, 40%, and 
33%, respectively. 

Suitability: "Suitability" refers to the appropriateness of the IT equipment 
for current operations. For example, the respective percentages of operating 
scope for which the three options are suitable are 12%, 30%, and 53%. 

Performance: "Performance," in this context, refers to the ability of the IT 
equipment to satisfy schedule and cost requirements. In the example, the 
three options can, respectively, satisfy requirements on 18%, 28%, and 52% 
of the typical set of jobs. 

Productivity: "Productivity" can be measured by an assessment of the per- 
formance of the proposed IT equipment to meet workload requirements 
in relation to the existing equipment. For our example, the three options, 
respectively, show normalized increases of 0.02, -1.0, and -1.1 on a uniform 
scale of productivity measurement. A plot of the histograms of the respec- 
tive "values" of the three IT options is shown in Figure 1.13. Option C is the 
best "value" alternative in terms of suitability and performance. Option B 
shows the best capability measure, but its productivity is too low to justify 
the needed investment. Option A offers the best productivity, but its suit- 
ability measure is low. The analytical process can incorporate a lower control 
limit into the quantitative assessment such that any option providing a value 
below that point will not be acceptable. 



TABLE 1.1 

Comparison 


of Information Technology Value Options 






IT Options 


Suitability 
(fc = l) 


Capability 
(fc = 2) 


Performance 
(fc = 3) 


Productivity 
(fc = 4) 


Option A 
Option B 
Option C 


0.12 
0.30 
0.53 


0.38 
0.40 
0.33 


0.18 
0.28 
0.52 


0.02 
-1.00 
-1.10 



22 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



0.5 



-0.5 



-1 



Suitability Capability Performance Productivity 



hiTTTTT 



ABC 



Minimum value target 



ABC ABC ABC 



Lower control limit 



FIGURE 1.13 

Relative system value weights of three IT options. 

The relative weights used in many justification methodologies are based on 
subjective propositions of decision makers. Some of those subjective weights 
can be enhanced by the incorporation of utility models. For example, the 
weights shown in Table 1.1 could be obtained from utility functions. There is 
a risk of spending too much time maximizing inputs at "point-of-sale" lev- 
els with little time-defining and refining outputs at the "wholesale" systems 
level. Without a systems view, we cannot be sure whether we are pursuing 
the right outputs. 



Engineering Project Management 

Using a project structure allows groups to come together to pursue coor- 
dinated engineering innovation in the oil and gas industry. Many of the 
grand challenges of engineering, compiled by the U.S. National Academy 
of Engineering (NAE) in 2008, have implications for the energy industry. 
The extract from the NAE document on the 14 grand challenges reads: "In 
sum, governmental and institutional, political and economic, and personal 
and social barriers will repeatedly arise to impede the pursuit of solutions 
to problems. As they have throughout history, engineers will have to inte- 
grate their methods and solutions with the goals and desires of all society's 
members." The above statement emphasizes the relevance of holistic systems 
thinking in problem solving for sustainability solutions. The 14 grand chal- 
lenges are listed below: 

1. Make solar energy economical: Solar energy provides less than 1% of 
the world's total energy, but it has the potential to provide much, 
much more. 

2. Provide energy from fusion: Human-engineered fusion has been dem- 
onstrated on a small scale. The challenge is to scale up the process 
to commercial proportions, in an efficient, economical, and environ- 
mentally benign way. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 23 



3. Develop carbon sequestration methods: Engineers are working on ways 
to capture and store excess carbon dioxide to prevent global warming. 

4. Manage the nitrogen cycle: Engineers can help restore balance to the 
nitrogen cycle with better fertilization technologies and by captur- 
ing and recycling waste. 

5. Provide access to clean water: The world's water supplies are facing 
new threats; affordable, advanced technologies could make a differ- 
ence for millions of people around the world. 

6. Restore and improve urban infrastructure: Good design and advanced 
materials can improve transportation and energy water, and waste 
systems, and also create more sustainable urban environments. 

7. Advance health informatics: Stronger health information systems not 
only improve everyday medical visits, but they are essential to coun- 
ter pandemics and biological or chemical attacks. 

8. Engineer better medicines: Engineers are developing new systems to 
use genetic information, sense small changes in the body, assess 
new drugs, and deliver vaccines. 

9. Reverse-engineer the brain: The intersection of engineering and neuro- 
science promises great advances in health care, manufacturing, and 
communication. 

10. Prevent nuclear terror: The need for technologies to prevent and 
respond to a nuclear attack is growing. 

11. Secure cyberspace: It is more than preventing identity theft. The criti- 
cal systems in banking, national security, and physical infrastruc- 
ture may be at risk. 

12. Enhance virtual reality: True virtual reality creates the illusion of actu- 
ally being in a different space. It can be used for training, treatment, 
and communication. 

13. Advance personalized learning: Instruction can be individualized 
based on learning styles, speeds, and interests to make learning 
more reliable. 

14. Engineer the tools of scientific discovery: In the century ahead, engi- 
neers will continue to be partners with scientists in the great quest 
for understanding many unanswered questions of nature. 

We do not know of any industry that is not touched by these global chal- 
lenges. The oil and gas industry has a direct role to play in all the areas 
listed because energy is the foundation for accomplishing the goals stated in 
the grand challenges. This requires the application of project management 
tools and techniques to bring about new products, services, and results effi- 
ciently within cost and schedule constraints. Society will be tackling these 
grand challenges for the foreseeable decades, and project management is one 



24 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



avenue through which we can ensure that the desired products, services, 
and results can be achieved. With the positive outcomes of these projects 
achieved, we can improve the global quality of life. Some of the critical issues 
to address are 

• Strategic implementation plans 

• Strategic communication 

• Knowledge management 

• Evolution of virtual operating environment 

• Structural analysis of projects 

• Analysis of integrative functional areas 

• Project concept mapping 

• Prudent application of technology 

• Scientific control 

• Engineering research and development 



Role of Emerging Nations 

Ladislaw (2011) documents the roles of rapidly emerging countries in energy 
development trends around the world. One of the least understood, but 
potentially important, trends in the energy field is how the development pri- 
orities of emerging economies are shaping energy markets around the world. 
Emerging economies are expected to make up the bulk of growth in the 
demand for energy in the coming decades. It is estimated that countries out- 
side the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) 
will account for more than 80% of the expected demand growth between 
2008 and 2035. Recognized as the global focus of energy expansion, the 
emerging economies will increasingly influence how new energy markets 
develop and function. The interrelated commercial frameworks, technology 
development and sharing, international regulatory developments, and alter- 
nate fuel preferences will dictate how the global system will operate. This 
will influence how energy companies compete. Project efficiency will form 
a key component of the energy market dynamics. Many global energy com- 
panies are developing new exploration and marketing strategies that pay 
attention to the local contents of their operations. This responsive approach 
will help open up new energy markets in developing nations. The approach 
and contents of this book provide a project systems basis for increasing the 
success and market competitiveness for the oil and gas industry around the 
world. 



World Systems Framework for Oil and Gas Industry 25 



References 



Badiru, A. B. 2009, Twin fates: Partnerships will keep manufacturers' doors open, 

Industrial Engineer, March, 40-44. 
Badiru, A. B. 2012, Project Management: Systems, Principles, and Applications, Taylor &amp; 

Francis /CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
Ladislaw, S. O. 2011, Energy and Development Trends: The Role of Rapidly Emerging 

Countries, A Report of the Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies, 

Washington, DC. 
Lorincz, J. 2008, Oil powers global industry, Manufacturing Engineering, February, 

55-57. 
Troxler, }. W. and Blank, L. 1989, A comprehensive methodology for manufactur- 
ing system evaluation and comparison, Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 8(3), 

176-183. 
William, T P. and William, T 2010, Meeting the Energy Challenges of the Future: A Guide 

for Policymakers, Report of the National Conference of State Legislators (http:// 

wivw.ncsl.org), Denver, Colorado. 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 



You have to speculate to accumulate. (An old West saying for mineral 
prospecting in Western United States) (Dodge, 1941) 

Fundamentally, there is no business like the oil and gas business. The industry 
affects almost everything else in the general consumer market. The need to 
develop practical, efficient, and cost-effective energy infrastructure has never 
been more urgent. Developments in solar, wind, nuclear power, biofuels, and 
new oil and gas technologies have necessitated strategic project management 
practices. The influence sphere of oil and gas has grown dramatically over the 
years. A big decline in distributor costs of oil and gas directly drives a large 
portion of wholesale prices. Thus, it should be of interest to the general public 
to manage oil and gas projects so as to lower operating costs that can spread 
positively to consumer marketplace. As a demonstration of the influence of the 
industry, in 2012, Delta Airlines (Reuters, 2012) may have followed the cliche, 
"If you can't beat them, join them." Recognizing that its financial results and 
operating costs are closely tied to fuel prices, the airline decided to bid on an oil 
refinery. This price hedging approach is expected to be followed by other non- 
energy-based large corporations in the coming years. Risk is also an inherent 
part of the oil and gas industry. Risk management must be a core component 
of a company's project management portfolio in the oil and gas industry. Risks 
can be mitigated, but not eliminated. In fact, risk is the essence of any enter- 
prise. In spite of government regulations designed to reduce accident risks in 
the energy industry, accidents will occasionally happen. Government regula- 
tors can work with oil and gas producers to monitor data and operations. This 
will only preempt a fraction of potential risks of incidents. For this reason, 
regulators must work with operators to ensure that adequate precautions are 
taken in all operating scenarios. Government and industry must work together 
in a risk-mitigation partnership, rather than in an adversarial "lording" rela- 
tionship. There is no risk-free activity in the oil and gas business. For example, 
many of the recent petroleum industry accidents involved human elements — 
errors, incompetence, negligence, and so on. How do you prevent negligence? 
You can encourage nonnegligent operation or incentivize perfect record, but 
human will still be human when bad things happen. Operators and regulators 
must build on experiences to map out the path to risk reduction in operations. 
Very few industries spark the sort of mixed sentiments that the oil and 
gas industry experiences. One day, ExxonMobil is hailed as the leader of 
Fortune 500 companies in 2012 first quarter earnings (Money, 2012). The next 



27 



28 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



day, Mexican Oil Company, Petroleos, faced widespread opposition for the 
project to drill at extraordinary depths in the Gulf of Mexico (Businessweek, 
2012). On yet another day, British Petroleum (BP) was criticized for the way 
it handled the initial postspill days following the Gulf of Mexico oil spill 
accident, which occurred in April 2010 (BBC, 2012). All the mixed sentiments, 
emotions, and reactions that result have direct impact on the management of 
oil and gas projects. 

Projects in the oil and gas industry are characterized by huge investments, 
massive interfaces, and complex engineering endeavors. The size and com- 
plexity of these projects require special attention in the project management 
process. Risks are a big part of oil and gas projects. The opening quote in this 
chapter as well as the Latin dictum, "Spera optimum para pessimum" — Hope 
for the best, prepare for the worst — provide a fitting platform for approaching 
oil and gas projects. Because you never know what you might find (or not find) 
in oil and gas projects, more attention needs to be paid to project planning, 
organization, control, and contingencies. Many aspects of the oil and gas busi- 
ness can benefit from better project management practices. The span of proj- 
ects of interest in the oil and gas industry includes the selected sample below: 

General operations 

Economics of the market 

Financing 

Product marketing 

Government relations 

Regulations 

Inspections 

Regulatory oversight 

Quality checks 

Compliance assessment 

Corporate alliances 

Human resources 

Hardware and software infrastructure 

Exploration and development 

• Forecasting 

• Geological research 

• Discoveries 

• Reserves 

• Area drilling 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 29 



Drilling and production 

• Drilling operations 

• Production operations 

• Field start-ups 

• Unconventional resources 



Processing 

Refining 

Operations 

Construction 

Capabilities 

Petrochemicals 

Gas processing 

New plants 

Capacities 

Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) markets 

Transportation 

• Tankers 

• Liquefied natural gas (LNG) 

• Pipelines 

To set a backdrop for potential project management scenarios in the oil 
and gas industry, a brief collection of snip-bits in the industry is presented in 
the sections that follow. 



Government Involvement 

One of the operating constraints affecting the oil and gas industry is the typical 
involvement of governments of the developing countries. Under national joint 
venture agreements, the government of a developing country may own (or be 
involved in) as much as 40% of an oil company. In some cases, a government 
may seek to have majority ownership. In 2012, in a bold nationalistic move, 
Argentina sought to gain control through majority stake (i.e., &gt;50%) in oil com- 
panies, foreign or domestic, that are operating in the country (Fox News, 2012). 



30 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Fate of Refineries 



A key fact about the oil business is that the oil industry is at refining capac- 
ity, which is more of the reason why prices are so high, and not because 
of shortage of supply of crude. Environmental policy has stifled any new 
construction of refineries because of extreme regulatory requirements. Oil 
companies have no incentive to build new refineries because this solves a 
national problem (security, economy, etc.) but is not economically sound for 
them. They are making money with the current infrastructure and have no 
reason to expand. More research should be directed at reducing the over- 
all risk to the global oil and gas system, considering spatial relationships 
between the several factors involved. 



Oil Sands Project 



It was reported in Houston in early 2012 that Koch Oil Sands Operating ULC 
has received conditional approval to build and operate the Gemini thermal oil 
sands project near Beaverdam in the Cold Lake area of Alberta (OGJ, 2012). The 
province's Energy Resources Conservation Board approved a two-stage recov- 
ery scheme based on steam-assisted gravity drainage to produce as much as 
10,000 b/d (barrels/day) of bitumen. The first stage includes drilling of a steam 
assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) well pair and two observation wells and con- 
struction of a processing facility and related pipelines, leading to the production 
of 1200 b/d. The second stage includes drilling of as many as 23 additional well 
pairs from five pads and construction of pipelines and a second-stage process- 
ing facility, as well as drilling of at least 15 observation wells. The conditions 
set special requirements for groundwater monitoring and for a plan to mitigate 
potential effects on surface water near two of the drilling pads. 



BP to Invest $4 Billion in Gulf of Mexico in 2012 

At the 2012 Offshore Technology Conference in Houston, Texas, it was 
announced that BP will invest $4 billion in the Gulf of Mexico in 2012 alone 
(OTC, 2012). This is a massive undertaking that will require massive project 
management operations. 

BP PLC has five offshore rigs operating in the Gulf of Mexico, which is 
the same number as it had before the April 2010 deepwater Macondo well 
blowout. By the year end, BP expects to add three more rigs focused on 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 31 



exploration, appraisal, and developments. BP is investing $4 billion in the 
gulf this year and hopes to invest at least that much every year for the next 
decade, creating a continuing opportunity for mega applications of proj- 
ect management tools and techniques. The Macondo incident prompted a 
fire and explosion on Transocean Ltd.'s Deepwater Horizon semisubmers- 
ible drilling rig and a massive oil spill off Louisiana in the Gulf of Mexico. 
In the Macondo aftermath, BP pressed ahead with its gulf exploration and 
development and a reinforced focus on risk management. BP currently has 
two rigs in operation at Thunder Horse, two at Atlantis, and one at Kaskida. 
Of the three rigs that BP expects to add to the gulf by year end, one of those 
rigs will be equipment brought back to the gulf from West Africa. The big 
new play is the Palaeogene or Lower Tertiary. In the Gulf of Mexico, this 
includes BP's discoveries at Kaskida in 2006 and Tiber in 2009. Each of these 
fields has accessible hydrocarbons today, but each also has resources that lie 
beyond our industry's current limit of 15,000 psi and 275°F. BP is working to 
increase its offshore exploration and production capabilities. These efforts 
will include sensing and monitoring systems for real-time subsea integ- 
rity management. BP is also working with others to develop subsea values, 
weighing 20 tons, capable of closing hydrocarbon flow in seconds. Making 
this vision a reality will require unprecedented collaboration across and 
outside of the industry — involving not only operators, vendors, and contrac- 
tors but also academics and regulators, not to mention project management 
professionals. This will be necessary to define codes and standards for the 
design, operation, and reliability of the new technology. BP is also working 
to become more transparent so it can earn the trust and confidence of the 
public and the regulators. BP plans to impose higher project standards upon 
its operations, share what it learns, and work together to attract people with 
different skills to the oil and gas industry. The company plans to access the 
deepest areas of the Gulf of Mexico, and the other great basins of the world. 
These are projects that call for new techniques of management and control. 



Flak of Fracking 

There are cracks in the acceptance of fracking technology for oil and gas. 
Fracking is the industry term for hydraulic fracturing, which is the process 
of injecting water, sand, and chemicals deep into the ground at high pressure 
to crack oil shale so that oil or gas can be harvested or siphoned out. The abil- 
ity to cheaply extract gas from shale rock has transformed the global energy 
outlook, but the method of cheap extraction is not generally accepted by 
everyone. Hydraulic fracturing, which was invented by Halliburton in 1947 
(Halliburton, 2011), is the widening of fractures in a rock layer caused by the 
high-pressure injection of chemicals with water. In a hydraulic fracturing job, 



32 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



"fracturing fluids" or "pumping fluids" consisting primarily of water and 
sand are injected under high pressure into the producing formation, creat- 
ing fissures that allow resources to move freely from rock pores where it 
is trapped. Typically, steel pipe known as surface casing is cemented into 
place at the uppermost portion of a well for the explicit purpose of protect- 
ing the groundwater. The depth of the surface casing is generally determined 
based on groundwater protection, among other factors. As the well is drilled 
deeper, additional casing is installed to isolate the formation(s) from which 
oil or natural gas is to be produced, which further protects groundwater 
from the producing formations in the well. Casing and cementing are critical 
parts of the well construction that not only protect any water zones but are 
also important to successful oil or natural gas production from hydrocarbon- 
bearing zones. Industry well design practices protect sources of drinking 
water from the other geologic zone of an oil and natural gas well with multi- 
ple layers of impervious rock. While 99.5% of the fluids used consist of water 
and sand, some chemicals are added to improve the flow. The composition of 
the chemical mixes varies from well to well. 

Hydraulic fractures form naturally, as in the case of veins or dikes, and 
industrial fracturing widens or creates fractures to speed up the migration of 
gas and petroleum from source rocks to reservoir rocks. This process is used 
to release petroleum, natural gas (including shale gas, tight gas, and coal seam 
gas), or other substances for extraction, via a technique called induced hydrau- 
lic fracturing, often shortened to tracking or hydrofracking. This type of frac- 
turing, known colloquially as a "frac job," creates fractures from a wellbore 
drilled into reservoir rock formations. A distinction can be made between low- 
volume hydraulic fracturing used to stimulate high-permeability reservoirs, 
which may consume typically 20,000-80,000 U.S. gallons (76,000-300,000 L; 
17,000-67,000 imp gal) of fluid per well, with high-volume hydraulic frac- 
turing, used in the completion of tight gas and shale gas wells; high-volume 
hydraulic fracturing can use as much as 2-3 million U.S. gallons (7.6-11 ML) 
of fluid per well. This latter practice has come under scrutiny internationally, 
with some countries suspending or even banning it. The first tracking job was 
performed in 1947, though the current tracking technique was first used in 
the late 1990s in the Barnett Shale in Texas. The energy from the injection of 
a highly pressurized tracking fluid creates new channels in the rock, which 
can increase the extraction rates and, ultimately, permit the recovery of fossil 
fuels. According to the International Energy Agency, the global use of natural 
gas will rise by more than 50% compared to 2010 levels, and account for over 
25% of world energy demand in 2035. Proponents of tracking point to the 
vast amounts of formerly inaccessible hydrocarbons the process can extract. 
However, there remain large uncertainties in the amount of gas reserves 
that can be accessed in this way. Detractors point to potential environmen- 
tal impacts, including contamination of ground water, risks to air quality, the 
migration of gases and hydraulic fracturing chemicals to the surface, surface 
contamination from spills and flow back, and the health effects of these. 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 33 



Rules, Laws, Regulations, and Standards 

Few industries are as subject to a multitude of rules, laws, regulations, and 
standards as the oil and gas industry. Standards provide a common basis for 
global commerce. Without standards, product compatibility, customer satis- 
faction, and production efficiency cannot be achieved. Just as quality cannot 
be achieved overnight, compliance with standards cannot be accomplished 
instantaneously. The process must be developed and incorporated into regu- 
lar operating procedures over a period of time. Standards define the critical 
elements that must be taken into consideration to produce a high-quality prod- 
uct that meets customers' expectations. Each organization must then develop 
the best strategy to address the elements. Both regulatory and consensus 
standards must be taken into account when executing oil and gas projects. 
Regulatory standards refer to standards that are imposed by a governing body, 
such as a government agency. All firms within the jurisdiction of the agency 
are required to comply with the prevailing regulatory standards. Consensus 
standards refer to a general and mutual agreement among a group of compa- 
nies to abide by a set of self-imposed standards. Industry alliances, such as 
OPEC, impose their own consensus standards and rules on themselves. There 
may also be contractual standards, which are imposed by the customer based on 
case-by-case or order-by-order needs. Most international standards will fall in 
the category of consensus. A lack of international agreements often leads to 
trade barriers by nations, industries, and special interest groups. 

In response to the widespread expressions of concerns about tracking, the 
U.S. government, the Environment Protection Agency (EPA), in April 2012 
issued new regulations to govern tracking (EPA, 2012). 

The standards are to control air pollution from gas wells that are drilled 
using tracking. The government strongly supports natural gas drilling as a 
clean source of energy and wanted to ensure coordination to ease the pro- 
duction burden on the oil and gas industry. EPA maintains that the new 
regulations would ensure pollution is controlled without slowing natural 
gas production. Much of the air pollution from tracked gas wells is vented 
when the well transitions from drilling to actual production. This is a 3-10- 
day process, which is referred to as "completion." An earlier version of the 
rule limiting air pollution from gas wells would have required companies 
to install pollution-reducing equipment immediately. Under the new rules, 
drillers will now be given more than 2 years to employ technology to reduce 
emissions of smog and soot-forming pollutants during that stage. EPA would 
require drillers to burn off gas in the meantime. This is an alternative that can 
release smog-forming nitrogen oxides, but will still reduce overall emissions. 
This is a good example of where a systems view is instrumental because as 
one hole is plugged at one end, some other issue may develop at the other end. 
The oil and gas industry must consider these new rules as well as other pro- 
duction and economic considerations into their overall project management 



34 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 




FIGURE 2.1 

Schematic of a typical tracking structure. 

strategies. About 25,000 wells a year undergo tracking in the United States. 
Figure 2.1 shows a typical schematic drawing of a tracking structure. 



Keystone Oil Pipeline 

The Keystone Pipeline System is a 1700-mile, $7-billion pipeline system 
to transport synthetic crude oil and diluted bitumen ("dilbit") from the 
Athabasca Oil Sands in northeastern Alberta, Canada to multiple destina- 
tions in the United States, which include refineries in Illinois, the Cushing oil 
distribution hub in Oklahoma, and proposed connections to refineries and 
export terminals along the Gulf Coast of Texas (Guardian, 2012). It consists 
of the operational "Keystone Pipeline" (Phase 1) and "Keystone-Cushing 
Extension" (Phase 2), and two proposed Keystone XL pipeline expansion seg- 
ments. After the Keystone XL pipeline segments are completed, American 
crude oil would enter the XL pipelines at Baker, Montana and Cushing, 
Oklahoma. The Keystone XL has faced lawsuits from oil refineries and criti- 
cism from environmentalists and some members of the U.S. Congress. The 
U.S. Department of State in 2010 extended the deadline for federal agencies 
to decide if the pipeline is in the national interest, and in November 2011, 
President Obama postponed the decision until 2013. The U.S. government 
blocked the pipeline in early 2012, citing uncertainty over the Nebraska route, 
which would travel above an aquifer that provides water to eight states. In 
April 2012, Calgary-based TransCanada, the company planning the Keystone 
XL oil pipeline, proposed a new route through Nebraska that would avoid the 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 35 



state's environmentally sensitive Sandhills region. In addition to the U.S. EPA, 
the State Department is also involved because the pipeline would cross a U.S. 
border. The twists and turns of the diverse involvement in oil and gas projects 
require extraordinary systems-based project management techniques. 



New Projects, New Project Management Opportunities 

In April 2012, it was announced (Akers Solutions, 2012) that Statoil has issued 
a contract to Aker Solutions to hire a category B drilling rig, a new type of 
rig, which is designed to increase recovery from the company's operating 
fields on the Norwegian continental shelf (NCS). Statoil has developed the 
new type of rig and well control system in cooperation with the supplier 
industry. The category B rig, which falls between light intervention vessels 
(category A) and conventional rigs (category C), has been specially adapted 
to carry out well intervention and drilling operations in existing subsea 
wells. The new rig, with associated integrated services, is expected to reduce 
operating costs for well intervention by as much as 40%, Statoil reported. 
The rig's design provides the option for a number of different types of well 
interventions using wireline and coiled tubing operations. The rig type is 
designed for year-round well service in Statoil-operated activities. This type 
of rig is also designed to carry out sidetrack drilling from production tubing 
(through tubing drilling) in a manner that allows simultaneous production 
from both the new sidetrack and existing production tubing. The well ser- 
vices are conducted through existing subsea network. The key to maintaining 
the current production level on the NCS is increased recovery from existing 
fields, along with the development of new fields. Increasing drilling activity 
on mature fields is important in order to achieve the NCS's full potential. In 
2011, Statoil operated about 500 subsea wells. Statoil and licensees will enter 
into an 8-year contract with options for three times 2 years for the category 
B service. The estimated value of the contract is $1.9 billion. In addition to 
rig rental, the contract also includes rental of the necessary equipment and 
services to carry out well intervention, sidetrack drilling, remotely operated 
vehicle operations, well testing, and cementing. If project management goes 
well, the rig will be in operation by 2015. 



Gas Export Project Management 

In February 2012, Kuwait Gulf Oil Co. let a contract to the Penspen Group 
(Penspen, 2012) for the project management and detailed design and 



36 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



construction of a natural gas and condensate export system (GCES) from 
Khafji, Saudi Arabia, on the Kuwait-Saudi border, to Kuwait. Penspen 
will manage engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contractor 
Technip. The new export system will carry 40 MMcfd of gas via 110 km of 
12-in.-OD export pipeline, of which about 47 km will be offshore. Penspen 
will oversee Technip's detailed design work, procurement activities, and 
construction undertaken by Technip and its subcontractors. Penspen will 
also assist with commissioning the final scheme. GCES will deliver conden- 
sate and gas product to Kuwait from Saudi Arabia, reducing gas flaring in 
the process. Technip's operating center in Abu Dhabi will execute the proj- 
ect, scheduled to be completed by the second half of 2014. DLB Comanche, 
which entered the Technip fleet with the acquisition of Global Industries, 
will complete offshore operations. 



Case Example of Shell's Use of PMBOK 

In May 2001, Shell International Exploration and Production Inc. reported 
the successful use of structured project management on their Brutus project, 
a deepwater tension leg platform (Shell, 2012). The company used new proj- 
ect management tactics based on the contents of the Project Management 
Institute (PMI)'s PMBOK, a standardization guideline established by the 
PMI. Standardization is needed as various elements of the offshore energy 
industry need a common language and common operating procedures so 
that they can better communicate with each other on complex deepwater 
projects. The procedures developed for the Brutus project were grouped 
and aligned in accordance with the PMBOK. A standardized work break- 
down structure and a new financial software system are just two examples 
of new project management tactics used in the project. The approach gave 
team members new insights into achieving the objectives and reinforced 
the basic principles of project management. Customer expectations were 
exceeded and efficiency improved. Future project teams can achieve benefits 
by similarly organizing their project management processes. Shell opined 
that projects must be able to stand on their own financially and be capable 
of paying their own bills. Cash flow is essential in project finance. People 
behave as rewarded. Consequently, it is suggested that organizations should 
tie the cash flow to the performance desired and people will respond posi- 
tively. Deepwater projects are particularly costly and of high risk. Project 
management tactics help companies gauge the accuracy of estimates for time 
and cost projections, Shell concluded. Project risk is often mismanaged. If 
projects are approved based on anticipated return on investment (ROI) with 
minimal analysis of risk, a project is set up for failure. Decisions based on 
incomplete information will be faulty during project execution. 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 37 



Hail to Project Management 

In a 2003 industry study/ owners of downstream petroleum and chemical 
companies ranked project management capability as the main consider- 
ation in choosing engineering contractors. The owners had concerns about 
the viability of contracting companies and the supply of reliable engineer- 
ing resources. These were some of the conclusions of a biennial survey of 
the global downstream EPC industry by Transmar Consult Inc., Houston in 
2003. The study designated seven engineering contractors as leading firms 
in executing projects: Bechtel Corp., Fluor Corp., Jacobs Engineering Group 
Inc., JGC Corp., KBR, Snamprogetti SPA, and Technip-Coflexip. 



Project Management Improve Operations 

In 2000, Transocean Sedco Forex Inc.'s Discoverer Deep Seas utilized mod- 
ern project management techniques to shorten cycle time and improve 
workflow procedures in dual-activity drillship operations. The Discoverer 
Deep Seas began work in the Gulf of Mexico in the fourth quarter 2000. 
It held a 5-year contract with Chevron Inc. at an estimated day rate of 
$205,000. After this vessel, only one drillship remains in the 3-year old 
drillship construction cycle. This ultra deep water vessel, which used a 
dual-activity design pioneered by the Discoverer Enterprise was delivered 
in the fourth quarter of 2000. 



Technology Project Management 

Technology project management reportedly improved multiwell shallow 
gas development in 1995, according to a presentation by Becker Husky Oil 
Operations Ltd. in Calgary, Canada (Becker, 1995). Because of time and eco- 
nomic constraints, a multiwell shallow gas development project in south- 
eastern Alberta required thorough prejob planning and special drilling, 
cementing, and completions designs. The project took place during a period 
of peak industry activity, putting extra challenges on logistics and services. 
The Medicine Hat shallow gas project, undertaken by Husky Oil Operations 
Ltd. in mid-1994, was a high-volume, short-time frame, and economically 
tight project schedule. But using technology project management techniques, 
the project came through on time and within budget. 



http://www.ieej.or.jp/aperc/pdf/downstream_study.pdf 



38 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Project Management Improves Well Control Events 

A 1995 report presented by Garold D. Oberlender (Oklahoma State University, 
Stillwater, Oklahoma) and L. William Abel (Wild Well Control Inc., Spring, 
Texas) is recounted here to illustrate how project management improved 
oil well control events (Oberlender and Abel, 1995). During a well control 
operation, the efficient use of personnel and equipment, through good proj- 
ect management techniques, contributes to increased safety and ensures a 
quality project. The key to a successful blowout control project is to use all 
resources in the most efficient manner. Excessive use of resources leads to 
unnecessary expenditures and delays in bringing the project under control. 

Effective project management techniques are critical for complex, schedule- 
intensive, well control projects. In a well control situation, information must 
be gathered and organized in a systematic manner so that good decisions can 
be made at the right time. A project team must be organized, and all efforts 
must be coordinated to focus on the common goal of completing the project 
efficiently. Project management is a process of orderly management of numer- 
ous tasks that must be accomplished simultaneously. Project management is 
defined as the art and science of coordinating people, equipment, materials, 
money, and schedules to complete a specified project on time and within 
approved costs. Project management techniques have steadily improved in 
the last 40 years. In the 1950s, formal techniques, such as the critical path 
method (CPM), were developed for managing large complex engineering 
and construction projects for the petrochemical industry. In the 1960s, com- 
puter automation of many project management techniques became possible, 
with sophisticated tracking models developed for controlling the progress of 
projects. In the 1980s, the introduction of personal computers provided even 
more access to automated project management techniques to allow planning, 
scheduling, monitoring, and controlling of work in a real-time environment. 

Lessons learned from the practice of good project management can be 
applied to wild well projects. In such emergency situations, the schedule of 
the project usually takes priority over all other considerations. Therefore, the 
ability to monitor progress carefully in a real-time environment is extremely 
important to controlling the project. Information must be gathered, orga- 
nized, and given to the right person at the right time so good decisions can 
be made under adverse conditions. Well control projects have various levels 
of complexity, and as the complexity increases, the need for a project man- 
agement approach becomes more important. 

Several complicated and difficult well control projects occurred in the 
1980s, and the cost to control these wells exceeded $200 million each. Many 
experienced individuals in any business will readily agree that a $200 mil- 
lion project justifies the use of advanced project management techniques to 
control and guide the efforts of all parties and ensure a successful outcome. 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 39 



Several of these multimillion dollar projects, however, were run without 
proper planning and with little or no application of a formal system of proj- 
ect management. The lack of good project management principles caused 
inefficiencies, delays, and higher costs. 

The Kuwait well control project, which involved more than 700 blowouts, 
was accomplished in a much shorter time (8 months) than first estimated 
(5 years). This improvement partly resulted from the application of sound 
project management techniques. These projects were prime examples of the 
need for a formal project management approach to handling wild well proj- 
ects. There are many examples of projects that were successful in controlling 
wells but were economic disasters. Only through the effective application 
of project management can complex well control projects be completed in 
reasonable time frames at reasonable cost. 

Team Management 

To be effective, a project team must be able to make things happen, which is 
best accomplished by maintaining a "Can do" attitude and working together 
as an integrated team. Effective teamwork is mandatory for bringing any 
wild well under control. 

The first step in organizing the team is selection of the project manager 
who is assigned full responsibility for all aspects of the project. This indi- 
vidual must have knowledge and experience in dealing with well control 
projects. Most importantly, he must be given the authority to make decisions 
and to act as the sole coordinator of all activities. 

Because the project manager must focus his full attention on the wild well, 
he must not be involved in any other work that may distract his attention and 
concentration. 

The first task of the project manager is to assess the condition of the well 
to determine viable options for bringing it under control. This task is best 
done if a proper contingency plan is already in place, providing for rapid 
deployment of predetermined action plans. The project manager must also 
establish proper communication channels with all appropriate authorities. 
He must have both a thorough knowledge of well control projects and effec- 
tive management skills. 

Because each wild well event is unique, the project team must be assem- 
bled, organized, and managed for the particular conditions at the well loca- 
tion. The project manager must assemble a team of people who have the right 
technical expertise to handle the job. He must be the leader of the team of 
individuals with diverse backgrounds and with special expertise to handle 
any problems that arise. Although a formal system of handling the project 
is needed, it is people that make things happen, and these people must have 
the ability to detect problems, make adjustments to the system, and make the 
right decisions at the right time. 



40 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Project Scope 

Although each wild well control project is unique, a well-managed project 
generally follows this sequence: 

• The team must define the scope of what must be accomplished, 
including giving priorities to tasks, identifying equipment and spe- 
cial expertise, and setting expected levels of quality, safety require- 
ments, and reliability of operations. 

• Although budget is often not a controlling factor in well control proj- 
ects, eventually the allocation and responsibility of cost expendi- 
tures must be addressed, including budgeting each task in the scope 
definition. 

• A strategy must be set for accomplishing the tasks. It is important to 
anticipate all events and to build contingency plans into the project 
for the unexpected deviations that often occur. 

• A timetable must be made for the planned work to ensure an inte- 
grated sequence of all tasks. 

• A tracking system must be developed to ensure the project pro- 
gresses as planned, by measuring actual work done versus the 
schedule. 

• The project should be closed out, which includes verification that 
all required tasks have been completed to ensure the project is in a 
stable condition and completed at an acceptable level of quality. 

These steps represent project management in its simplest form. In practice, 
there is considerable overlap in the sequences because there are many parties 
involved, and the work of one may affect the work of others. Thus, extensive 
coordination is required. Most existing project management literature deals 
with engineering design, construction, or manufacturing work and not with 
wild well control projects. The issues that are discussed generally focus on 
expediting the work in a schedule-compressed mode, similar to a fast-track 
construction project. Thus, the basic principles of project management apply 
to schedule-driven wild well control projects. The most important task for 
any project is to define the scope of work. A fundamental principle of proj- 
ect management is that any project, regardless of its size or type, consists of 
three components: scope, budget, and schedule. Each of these components 
must be described in detail and linked to the others. For example, as the 
scope of work increases, the cost and time to do the work will also increase. 
Defining the project scope must precede defining the budget or schedule. 

In a wild well project, the overall objective is to extinguish the fire and bring 
the well under control. Other objectives, however, may also be extremely 
important. For example, the objectives may include controlling the well in a 
way that allows drilling operations to resume so the well can eventually be 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 41 



produced rather than abandoned. In construction projects, the emphasis is 
too often incorrectly placed on budget and schedule and not on the scope or 
quality of work. In well control projects, there may be excessive emphasis on 
schedule and on controlling the well as quickly as possible without regard to 
the impact on budget, scope, or quality. Because of the nature of well control 
projects and the pressures to achieve a quick solution, it is often difficult to 
manage the project efficiently. Careful planning beforehand will provide a 
workable and rational solution for the operations group. 

The well control company is best suited to be involved in the design and 
implementation of the control operation, provided its personnel have the 
skill and capabilities to perform project management duties. If the well con- 
trol company has engineering expertise that is fully integrated in its field 
operations, they will be best suited for overall coordination and manage- 
ment of the project. Regardless of the type of well control project, there must 
be a single project manager who is responsible for coordinating all aspects 
of the project. The project manager is responsible for reporting to the opera- 
tor or team with complete responsibility and authority for making decisions. 
The most successful well control projects have been completed by a compe- 
tent project manager who had the technical expertise and the management 
skills necessary to ensure the work was performed as and when needed. 
Committees, with a group acting as a project manager, tend to have slow 
decision making and be bureaucratic. 

In well control project management, four fundamental questions must be 
addressed: Who is going to do it? What are they going to do? When are they 
going to do it? And, how much is it going to cost? A lack of an answer to 
any of these questions during the project will usually result in additional 
problems. The most important skill the project manager must possess is 
the ability to be an effective communicator. Regardless of his abilities as an 
engineer or manager, he will be ineffective if he lacks communication skills. 
The project manager must have the technical knowledge of what needs to 
be done and the ability to communicate that knowledge to others. To bring a 
blowout under control, many different types of expertise are required. Thus, 
the project manager must have the ability to delegate authority and respon- 
sibility to the specialists involved so he can concentrate on the overall project 
objectives. The central axiom for project management is to organize the proj- 
ect around the work to be done rather than trying to force events to fit some 
predetermined organization. 

Organizational Structures 

Regardless of the type of management organization chosen for a well control 
event, the main consideration must be a bias for action. The management 
group must focus on five major functions: planning, organizing resources, 
selecting staff, coordinating work, and controlling the operation. Each well 
control project is unique and requires a suitable choice of organizational 



42 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



structure, the most common of which are discipline, functional, and matrix 
organizations. In a discipline-oriented organization, personnel who share the 
same technical expertise are placed in common departments. For example, 
all civil engineering expertise is located in the civil engineering department, 
and so on. A functional organization places individuals in departments that 
focus on specific processes, such as reservoir engineering, production engi- 
neering, or drilling and completion. 

The matrix organization places overall management responsibilities in 
a management group. The management group obtains technical expertise 
from the various departments in the company and, if necessary, secures 
assistance from sources outside of the company. The most desirable orga- 
nizational structure for a well control event depends on numerous factors, 
including the severity and complexity of the event and the availability of 
technical expertise. For routine projects, either the discipline or functional 
approach may be suitable. For a complex and technically difficult project, the 
matrix organization is preferable. The two structures recommended for well 
control events are the functional and matrix organizations. The functional 
organization disperses the disciplines among the departments in a company. 
Project teams are formed within the departmental group. Management is 
usually accomplished by the team leader or project manager, who also is a 
member of the department. 

On occasion, a drilling department may be called upon to function in the 
role of project manager to oversee the blowout control event. This arrange- 
ment may be acceptable for smaller, more routine projects but can present 
some problems in dealing effectively with a major event. A common error in 
the management of well control projects is to attempt to direct the work from 
within a departmental group, which retains all of its existing responsibilities. 
This method dilutes the efforts of the project manager, and one or more of his 
projects will suffer as a result. Well control events should be managed by a 
single person who has no other priorities or responsibilities, a person who can 
focus his attention exclusively on the complex process of controlling the well. 

The matrix organization increases the importance of managing cost and 
schedule and maintaining the general balance among all the elements of the 
project. A separate project management organization directs the job, with the 
support of technical expertise from the discipline departments. The objective 
is to keep the disciplines in their home environments where they function 
best, while making their expertise available to meet the needs of the project. 
The matrix organization requires two lines of communication: one to the disci- 
pline organization and the other to the project organization. A discipline man- 
ager answers any specific questions. Issues related to the project are addressed 
by the project manager. In the matrix organization, the project manager coor- 
dinates all aspects of the well control project. Each discipline is responsible for 
its portion of the project, such as quality, cost, or schedule. 

Matrix organizations can be strong or weak. In a strong matrix, the project 
manager has the authority to decide what is best overall for the project. In a 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 43 



weak matrix, the discipline group has the authority to make decisions for the 
project. The success of the matrix organization is highly dependent on the 
company's philosophy and even more so on the attitude of the employees 
involved. If discipline managers are more concerned about their discipline 
than the project, the project can have inefficiencies and delays. A key to a 
successful project is a balance between the technical expertise of the disci- 
pline departments and the project management group. Technical personnel 
generally concentrate on producing the best product possible, often without 
regard to cost or schedule. In a well control project, quality and schedule 
generally take priority, although cost is always an important consideration. 

Scheduling 

Planning, measuring, evaluating, forecasting, and controlling are the key 
responsibilities of the project management team. All aspects of the project 
must be tracked and managed to ensure effective control of the project. 
Tracking cannot take place unless a well-defined work plan, budget, and 
schedule have been developed. Planning should precede project scheduling. 
For the entire well control project, there must be an explicit operational plan 
that binds scope, budget, and schedule. A common error of planning is to 
concentrate solely on schedule and disregard the importance of scope and 
budget. The following are the key principles of planning: 

• Begin planning before the start of work, not after. 

• The people who will actually do the work should be involved in 
planning and scheduling from the onset. 

• The plan must give balanced consideration to the aspects of scope, 
budget, schedule, and quality. 

• The plan should be flexible, including allowances for respond- 
ing to unexpected changes and with time allotted for review and 
approvals. 

• The plan must be kept simple and without irrelevant details that 
prevent readability. 

• The plan should be distributed to and understood by all parties 
involved. 

Tracking Models 

Planning is the first step in project scheduling, but tracking is equally essen- 
tial. Tracking cannot detect deviations unless there is a master plan or sched- 
ule against which to compare actual progress. The size, complexity, duration, 
and importance of the well control project dictate the technique used for proj- 
ect scheduling. The tracking model must be functional and easy to use. Two 
methods meet these criteria: bar charts (sometimes called Gantt charts) and the 



44 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



CPM. Because bar charts are simple and easy to interpret, they are usable by all 
participants in a project. Bar charts have three drawbacks: They do not show 
interdependency of activities; they require considerable time for updating; and 
they do not integrate costs or resources. A common complaint about Gantt 
charts is the high level of effort required to keep the charts updated. A signifi- 
cant amount of labor and time must be expended in keeping the charts current 
because of constantly changing conditions, such as man-hour requirements. 

Critical Path Method 

Both the CPM and the program evaluation and review technique (PERT) 
are often referred to as network analysis systems. CPM takes a determinis- 
tic approach, which assigns a single duration to each activity in the network, 
whereas PERT is a probabilistic approach that deals with three possible times 
for each activity (optimistic, pessimistic, and normal). Experience with fast track 
projects, such as blowouts, has shown CPM to be the preferred method. CPM 
forces the project team to direct all efforts to a single start date to kick off the 
project and a single completion date to bring the project under control. Both 
Gantt charts and CPM are suitable for well control projects. The Gantt charts are 
best suited for situations involving activities that do not have significant inter- 
dependencies with other activities (such as design work and public relations). 

The CPM method is a preferred approach for planning and scheduling 
more complex well control projects, situations in which activities are highly 
interdependent, or where there is a need to track resources assigned to the 
project. CPM uses a network diagram to model the interdependencies of 
activities. CPM forces the project team to divide the work into definable 
units and to determine how work items interface with each other. A well- 
defined work breakdown structure (which shows the primary and second- 
ary responsibilities for each member of the well control team) will greatly 
simplify the task of generating the CPM network diagram. 

Many project managers use precedence diagrams for well control that only 
shows major events; the numerical coding system, activity duration, and 
resources have been omitted to simplify the illustration. These diagrams 
require fewer activities to describe the project and have great flexibility in 
sequencing activities and showing relationships between them. CPM has 
adapted computer-aided techniques to automate calculations for schedul- 
ing and the graphic printout of network diagrams. The use of computers in 
CPM allows modeling of man-hours, costs, and duration to closely monitor 
work progress and produce a variety of project management reports. 

Decision Trees 

Well control events are unique projects that require quick decisions for criti- 
cal problems to be solved expeditiously. The project manager must be able 
to "think on his feet" and react to emergency situations in adverse working 



Characteristics of Oil and Gas Projects 45 



conditions, especially during kill operations. Contingency planning for likely 
scenarios is essential to increase the probability of success. Decision trees are 
useful to help the project manager run the job. 

The snip-bits presented above represent just a sample of the thousands of 
project-related events, issues, and developments in the oil and gas industry. 
As can be seen, there are tremendous areas of need for project management 
in the industry. The chapters that follow will address specific tools, tech- 
niques, and concepts of project management as relevant for applications in 
the oil and gas industry. The framework used in the contents that follow 
center around the following knowledge areas: 

• Managerial processes 

• Technical systems 

• Human interfaces 

• Systems engineering 

Both quantitative and qualitative aspects of project management are cov- 
ered to the extent that they can benefit researchers, educators, students, and 
practitioners as reference materials. 



Oil Bunkering in Developing Nations 

The so-called oil bunkering occurs when thieves tap into an oil pipeline. The 
culprits either sell the oil or produce poorly refined petroleum products that 
are sold on the black market. This practice is very common in impoverished 
communities in developing countries and it has grave adverse impacts on 
the country's oil industry. The danger of explosion posed by the illegal activ- 
ity creates difficulties in executing pipeline projects. The cost and time impli- 
cations of dealing with the aftermaths of oil bunkering translate to schedule 
inconveniences as well as project execution disruptions. 



References 



Akers Solutions. 2012. http://www.akersolutions.com/en/Global-menu/Media/ 
Press-Releases/ All/ 2012/ Aker-Solutions-and-Statoil-awarded-ONS- 
Innovation-Award/, accessed April 25, 2012. 

BBC. 2012. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-10656239, accessed May 
5, 2012. 



46 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Becker, D. L. 1995. Technology Project Management Improved Multhvell Shallow Gas 

Development, http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/volume-93/issue-42/in-this- 

issue / drilling / technology-project-management-improved-multiwell-shallow- 

gas-development.html, October 16, 1995. 
Businessweek. 2012. http://www.businessweek.com/stories/, accessed May 1, 2012. 
Dodge, D. 1941. Death and Taxes, 1st Edition, MacMillan, New York, NY. 
EPA. 2012. http://www.epa.gov/hydraulicfracture/, accessed April 25, 2012. 
Fox News. 2012. http://www.foxnews.com/.../04/.../venezuela-rejects-threats- 

against-argentina..., accessed April 17, 2012. 
Guardian. 2012. http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/jan/18/, accessed 

Febuary 1, 2012. 
Halliburton. 2011. http://www.halliburton.com/public/projects/pubsdata/.../frac 

turing_101. htm..., accessed December 5, 2011. 
Money. 2012. http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500/2011/full_ 

list/, accessed March 2, 2012. 
Oberlender, G. D. and Abel, L. W. 1995. Project Management Improves Well Control 

Events, http://www.ogj.com/articles/print/volume-93/issue-28.html, July 10, 

1995. 
OGJ (Oil and Gas Journal). 2012. www.ogj.com/articles/... /ercb-approves-gemini-oil- 

sands-project.html, accessed May 6, 2012. 
OTC (Offshore Technology Conference). 2012. http://wwTV.otcnet.org/2012/, 

accessed March 10, 2012. 
Penspen. 2012. http://www.penspen.com/News/Pages/PenspenawardedProject 

ManagementServicesbyKuwaitGulfOilCompanyforGasandCondensateExport 

System.aspx, accessed March 18, 2012. 
Reuters. 2012. http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/04/04/delta-refinery-idUSL..., 

accessed April 12, 2012. 
Shell. 2012. http://www.shell.us/home/content/usa/aboutshell/projects_locations/ 

gulf_of_mexico/brutus_0308/, accessed January 7, 2012. 



3 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



The rapid growth of technology in the workplace has created new chal- 
lenges for those who plan, organize, control, and execute complex proj- 
ects. With the diversity of markets globally, project integration is of great 
concern. Using a consistent body of knowledge can alleviate the potential 
problems faced in the project environment. Projects in the oil and gas indus- 
try are particularly complex and dynamic, thus necessitating a consistent 
approach. The use of project management continues to grow rapidly The 
need to develop effective management tools increases with the increasing 
complexity of new technologies and processes. The life cycle of a new prod- 
uct to be introduced into a competitive market is a good example of a com- 
plex process that must be managed with integrative project management 
approaches. The product will encounter management functions as it goes 
from one stage to the next. Project management will be needed throughout 
the design and production stages of the product. Project management will 
be needed in developing marketing, transportation, and delivery strategies 
for the product. When the product finally gets to the customer, project man- 
agement will be needed to integrate its use with those of other products 
within the customer's organization. The need for a project management 
approach is established by the fact that a project will always tend to increase 
in size even if its scope is narrowing. The following four literary laws are 
applicable to any project environment: 

Parkinson's law: Work expands to fill the available time or space. 

Peter's principle: People rise to the level of their incompetence. 

Murphy's law: Whatever can go wrong will. 

Badiru's rule: The grass is always greener where you most need it to be 
dead. 

An integrated systems project management approach can help diminish 
the adverse impacts of these laws through good project planning, organiz- 
ing, scheduling, and control. The Project Management Institute, as a way 
of promoting a common language for the practice of project management, 
developed the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK), which 
has been widely adopted around the world. 



47 



48 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Project Management Knowledge Areas 

The nine knowledge areas presented in the PMBOK are listed below: 

1. Integration 

• Integrative project charter 

• Project scope statement 

• Project management plan 

• Project execution management 

• Change control 

2. Scope management 

• Focused scope statements 

• Cost/benefits analysis 

• Project constraints 

• Work breakdown structure 

• Responsibility breakdown structure 

• Change control 

3. Time management 

• Schedule planning and control 

• PERT and Gantt charts 

• Critical path method 

• Network models 

• Resource loading 

• Reporting 

4. Cost management 

• Financial analysis 

• Cost estimating 

• Forecasting 

• Cost control 

• Cost reporting 

5. Quality management 

• Total quality management 

• Quality assurance 

• Quality control 

• Cost of quality 

• Quality conformance 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 49 



6. Human resources management 

• Leadership skill development 

• Team building 

• Motivation 

• Conflict management 

• Compensation 

• Organizational structures 

7. Communications 

• Communication matrix 

• Communication vehicles 

• Listening and presenting skills 

• Communication barriers and facilitators 

8. Risk management 

• Risk identification 

• Risk analysis 

• Risk mitigation 

• Contingency planning 

9. Procurement and subcontracts 

• Material selection 

• Vendor prequalification 

• Contract types 

• Contract risk assessment 

• Contract negotiation 

• Contract change orders 

The above segments of the body of knowledge of project management 
cover the range of functions associated with any project, particularly com- 
plex ones. 



Project Definitions 
Project 



A project is traditionally defined as a unique one-of-kind endeavor with 
a specific goal that has a definite beginning and a definite end. PMBOK 
defines a project as a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique 



50 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



product, service, or result. Temporary means having a defined beginning 
and a definite end. The term "unique" implies that the project is different 
from other projects in terms of characteristics. 

Project Management 

This author defines project management as the process of managing, allocat- 
ing, and timing resources to achieve a given goal in an efficient and expedi- 
tious manner. 

PMBOK defines project management as the application of knowledge, 
skills, tools, and techniques to project activities to achieve project objectives. 

Other sources define project management as the collection of skills, tools, 
and management processes essential for executing a project successfully. 

Project Management Methodology 

A project management methodology defines a process that a project team uses 
in executing a project, from planning through phase-out. Figure 3.1 presents 
general framework for cross-functional application of the project management 
methodology. People, process, and technology assets (science and engineer- 
ing) form the basis for implementing organizational goals. Human resources 
constitute crucial capital that must be recruited, developed, and preserved. 
Organizational work process must take advantage of the latest tools and tech- 
niques such as business process reengineering (BPR), continuous process 
improvement (CPI), Lean, Six Sigma, and systems thinking. The coordinated 
infrastructure represents the envelope of operations and includes physical 
structures, energy, leadership, operating culture, and movement of materials. 
The ability of an organization to leverage science and technology to move up 
the global value chain requires the softer side of project management in addi- 
tion to the technical techniques. Another key benefit of applying integrative 
project management to oil and gas projects centers around systems safety. 
Science, technology, and engineering undertakings can be volatile and subject 
to safety violations through one of the following actions: 

1. Systems or individuals who deliberately, knowingly, willfully, or 
negligently violate embedded safety requirements in science, tech- 
nology, and engineering projects 

2. Systems or individuals who inadvertently, accidentally, or carelessly 
compromise safety requirements in science, technology, and engi- 
neering projects 

The above potential avenues for safety violation make safety training, 
education, practice, safety monitoring, and ethics very essential. An integra- 
tive approach to project management helps to cover all the possible ways for 
safety compromise. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



51 



Oil and gas . 
project management 



People 



Recruitment 

Education 

Training 

Development 

Retention 

Advancement 

Workforce right-sizing 




Infrastructure 



Process 



Brick and mortar 

Energy 

Organization structure 

Leadership 

Culture 

Transformation 

Transportation 

Materials integrity 

Safety and security 

Legislation and regulation 

Technology and engineerin 



Business process 

Process improvement 

Lean 

Six-sigma 

Systems thinking 

Asset management 

Capacity utilization 



IT 

Data 

Research 

Development 

Prototyping 

Sustainability 




FIGURE 3.1 

Framework for cross-functional application of project management. 

Project Management Information System 

A project management information system (PMIS) refers to an automated 
system or computer software used by the project management team as a tool 
for the execution of the activities contained in the project management plan. 

Project Management System 

A project management system (PMS) is the set of interrelated project elements 
whose collective output, through synergy, exceeds the sum of the individual 
outputs of the elements. 



Composition of a Program 

A program is defined as a recurring group of interrelated projects managed 
in a coordinated and synergistic manner to obtain integrated results that are 



52 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



■^Organizational enterprise 
■► System of systems 
•^ Systems 

^Programs 

-&gt; Projects 

■♦Work packages 
■» Tasks 

-♦Activities 
*WBS 
elements 



FIGURE 3.2 

Hierarchy of project systems. 



better than what is possible by managing the projects individually. Programs 
often include elements of collateral work outside the scope of the individual 
projects. Thus, a program is akin to having a system of systems of projects, 
whereby an entire enterprise might be affected. While projects have definite 
end points, programs often have unbounded life spans. Figure 3.2 shows the 
hierarchy of project systems, from organizational enterprise to work break- 
down structure (WBS) elements. 



Identification of Stakeholders 

Stakeholders are individuals or organizations whose interests may be posi- 
tively or negatively impacted by a project. Stakeholders must be identified 
by the project team for every project. A common deficiency in this require- 
ment is that organization employees are often ignored, neglected, or taken 
for granted as stakeholders in projects going on in the organization. As the 
definition of stakeholders clearly suggests, if the interests of the employees 
can be positively or negatively affected by a project, then the employees must 
be viewed as stakeholders. All those who have a vested interest in the project 
are stakeholders and this might include the following: 

• Customers 

• Project sponsor 

• Users 

• Associated companies 

• Community 

• Project manager 

• Owner 

• Project team members 

• Shareholders 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 53 



Project Management Processes 

The major knowledge areas of project management are administered in a 
structured outline covering six basic clusters as depicted in Figure 3.3. The 
implementation clusters represent five process groups that are followed 
throughout the project life cycle. Each cluster itself consists of several func- 
tions and operational steps. When the clusters are overlaid on the nine 
knowledge areas, we obtain a two-dimensional matrix that spans 44 major 
process steps. 

Table 3.1 shows an overlay of the project management knowledge areas 
and the implementation clusters. The monitoring and controlling clusters 
are usually administered as one lumped process group (monitoring and con- 
trolling). In some cases, it may be helpful to separate them to highlight the 
essential attributes of each cluster of functions over the project life cycle. In 
practice, the processes and clusters do overlap. Thus, there is no crisp demar- 
cation of when and where one process ends and where another one begins 
over the project life cycle. In general, project life cycle defines the following: 

1. Resources that will be needed in each phase of the project life cycle 

2. Specific work to be accomplished in each phase of the project life 
cycle 

Figure 3.4 shows the major phases of project life cycle going from the con- 
ceptual phase through the close-out phase. It should be noted that project 
life cycle is distinguished from product life cycle. Project life cycle does not 
explicitly address operational issues whereas product life cycle is mostly 
about operational issues starting from the product's delivery to the end of 
its useful life. Note that for oil and gas projects, the shape of the life cycle 
curve may be expedited due to the rapid developments that often occur in 
technology For example, for an exploration technology project, the entire 
life cycle may be shortened, with a very rapid initial phase, even though the 

Project life cycle 




FIGURE 3.3 

Implementation clusters for project life cycle. 



54 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



CO 

&lt; 



« 


oc 


CD 


c 


9 


3 

u 


en 


OJ 


« 


X 


oj 


UJ 


u 




o 




h 




Cu 





_5 

U 
c 

o 



c 



c 

OJ 

£ 

OJ 

to 
a 

c 

to 



1 
&gt; 

o 



60 

■a 

OJ 

1 

O 

c 

;2 



§ 2 





o 




o 


X 


u 


3 


C 


u 




M 


o 


Tj 


'^H 


c 


u 




&gt; 




u 


QJ 
=3 


hP 


o 


QJ 


13 



SP &amp;. O- 



5 ■£ 



o 

5 

c 
o 



o 
U 



60 C 

fO O 

§ a 



53 tj 



.)_&gt; 


Qj 


tj 




as 


'o 


H 


(H 


5 


C^ 



.5 B 



60 W) 

S .5 

I J c 

£ cu QJ E 

'0 « s ^ 



"qj £ 

&gt; cC 



ft -a &gt;*■ 

OJ 01 &amp; 

&amp;. ft j 
P P a 



S~ UJ 3 

P^ ^-* £^"i ?**■* — 



60 60 
£■$ 

&lt;o qj 
6 so 

T3 
.. 3 
0) _Q 



■3 ••» 



&gt; &gt; &gt; &gt; "S 

+3 '.3 '.3 +3 r en en 
_ O U o O *fl o O 



3 

a 



£ b 




X ro 




u .S 




_■§ | 


o 


"5 QJ 


G- 


i- '- 


o 


a a 


u 


a a 


-H 


_o o 


'-J 




O 


"qj *qj 




&gt; &gt; 


O 


QJ QJ 


S- 


£ 










ft 

G 



O 
U 



a 



60 



^ tJ 



m o&gt; 



o 3 
ft o 
qj x 



"d to 



'FT SH * 



01 C 

qj o 

60 3 



(SS 2 











a 



























a 


£ 


■^ 


£ 




QJ 


u 








QJ 


QJ 


^ 


2 


QJ 
U 

s 


'5 

in 
ft 
QJ 
H 


'5 

l-H 
ft 
ft 


Q 





3 


3 


"oj 




'j— 


to 


cr 


&gt; 


s 


o 

ft 


&lt; 


a; 



3 



g 

'2 



3 



60 
.S 



ft 

3 
G 



1 8 

2 3 

C O 

6 " 



G 






U 


60 






3 


y: 




'2 


m '55 v~ 




§ 


•s &gt;, M&gt; 




H 






Si ° 


c 




QJ -rt 

E to 


-^ .23 ft 




.2 n QJ 




QJ r -&gt; 


SH QJ Cfi 




bO^ 


QJ &gt; S 




(0 j_. 
(3 QJ 


alitativ 
antitati 
k respo 




2 S 




^ ^ 




u^ y^ 


3 3 .2 




3Sao« 



3 



o 




U 




en 








(Tj 




c 




: 




C^ 




'J"j 




■.■ 




H 




(h 




JjJ 


H 


QJ 


OJ 


'J~j 


^ 




OJ 


'J~j 


/; 


QJ 




5 


U 


&amp; 


r^H 


Qj 


*QJ 


C^ 


yi 


en 




£ 




o 
















EO 








3 




cr 




u 




ca 




-o 




c 




H 


M 


CO 






.=1 


!/J 




- 




'J 




5 


"2 

G 


c^ 


r .j 


c 


3 


03 


to 



G 

u 



ft 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



55 




Time 



FIGURE 3.4 

Phases of project life cycle. 



conceptualization stage may be very long. Typical characteristics of project 
life cycle include the following: 

1. Cost and staffing requirements are lowest at the beginning of the 
project and ramp up during the initial and development stages. 

2. The probability of successfully completing the project is lowest at the 
beginning and highest at the end. This is because many unknowns 
(risks and uncertainties) exist at the beginning of the project. As 
the project nears its end, there are fewer opportunities for risks and 
uncertainties. 

3. The risks to the project organization (project owner) are lowest at the 
beginning and highest at the end. This is because not much invest- 
ment has gone into the project at the beginning, whereas much has 
been committed by the end of the project. There is a higher sunk cost 
manifested at the end of the project. 

4. The ability of the stakeholders to influence the final project out- 
come (cost, quality, and schedule) is highest at the beginning and 
gets progressively lower toward the end of the project. This is 
intuitive because influence is best exerted at the beginning of an 
endeavor. 

5. The value of scope changes decreases over time during the project 
life cycle while the cost of scope changes increases over time. The 
suggestion is to decide and finalize scope as early as possible. If 
there are to be scope changes, do them as early as possible. 

The specific application context will determine the essential elements 
contained in the life cycle of the endeavor. Life cycles of business entities, 
products, and projects have their own nuances that must be understood 
and managed within the prevailing organizational strategic plan. The 



56 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 

components of corporate, product, and project life cycles are summarized 
as follows: 

Corporate (business) life cycle: 

Planning -&gt; Needs -&gt; Business conceptualization -&gt; 
Realization -&gt; Portfolio management 

Product life cycle: 

Feasibility studies -^ Development -&gt; Operations -&gt; Product obsolescence 
Project life cycle: 

Initiation -&gt; Planning -&gt; Execution -&gt; Monitoring and control -&gt; Closeout 

This book covers the knowledge areas sequentially in Chapters 2 through 
10 in the order listed above. There is no strict sequence for the application 
of the knowledge areas to a specific project. The areas represent a mixed 
bag of processes that must be followed in order to achieve a successful proj- 
ect. Thus, some aspects of integration may be found under the knowledge 
area for communications. In a similar vein, a project may start with the risk 
management process before proceeding into the integration process. The 
knowledge areas provide general guidelines. Each project must adapt and 
tailor the recommended techniques to the specific need and unique circum- 
stances of the project. PMBOK seeks to standardize project management 
terms and definitions by presenting a common lexicon for project manage- 
ment activities. 

Specific strategic, operational, and tactical goals and objectives are 
embedded within each step in the loop. For example, "initiating" may 
consist of project conceptualization and description. Part of "execut- 
ing" may include resource allocation and scheduling. "Monitoring" may 
involve project tracking, data collection, and parameter measurement. 
"Controlling" implies taking corrective action based on the items that are 
monitored and evaluated. "Closing" involves phasing out or terminating 
a project. Closing does not necessarily mean a death sentence for a project, 
as the end of one project may be used as the stepping stone to the next 
series of endeavors. 

Factors of STEP Project Success or Failure 

There are several factors that impinge on the success or failure of a project. 
In oil and gas projects, factors that enhance project success include the 
following: 

• Well-defined scope 

• Communication among project team members 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 57 



• Cooperation of project teams 

• Coordination of project efforts 

• Proactive management support 

• Measurable metrics of project performance 

• Identifiable points of accountability 

• Realistic time, cost, and requirements 

When projects fail, it is often due to a combination of the following factors 
related to project requirements: 

Requirements are incomplete 

Poor definition of project objectives 

Poor definition of scope and premature acceptance 

Requirements are unrealistic 

Requirements are ambiguous 

Requirements are inconsistent 

Changes in requirements are unbudgeted 

Poor management support 

Lack of alignment of project objectives with organizational objectives 

Poor communication 

Lack of cooperation 

Deficient coordination of project efforts 



Work Breakdown Structure 

WBS represents the foundation over which a project is developed and 
managed. WBS refers to the itemization of a project for planning, schedul- 
ing, and control purposes. WBS defines the scope of the project. In the proj- 
ect implementation template, WBS is developed within the scope knowledge 
area under the planning cluster. The WBS diagram presents the inherent 
components of a project in a structured block diagram or interrelation- 
ship flow chart. WBS shows the relative hierarchies of parts (phases, seg- 
ments, milestone, etc.) of the project. The purpose of constructing a WBS is 
to analyze the elemental components of the project in detail. If a project is 
properly designed through the application of WBS at the project planning 
stage, it becomes easier to estimate cost and time requirements of the project. 
Project control is also enhanced by the ability to identify how components 
of the project link together. Tasks that are contained in the WBS collectively 



58 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



describe the overall project goal. Overall project planning and control can be 
improved by using a WBS approach. A large project may be broken down 
into smaller subprojects that may, in turn, be systematically broken down 
into task groups. Thus, WBS permits the implementation of a "divide-and- 
conquer" concept for project control. 

Individual components in a WBS are referred to as WBS elements, and 
the hierarchy of each is designated by a level identifier. Elements at the 
same level of subdivision are said to be of the same WBS level. Descending 
levels provide increasingly detailed definition of project tasks. The com- 
plexity of a project and the degree of control desired determine the number 
of levels in the WBS. Each component is successively broken down into 
smaller details at lower levels. The process may continue until specific 
project activities (WBS elements) are reached. In effect, the structure of the 
WBS looks very much like an organizational chart. But it should be empha- 
sized that WBS is not an organization chart. The basic approach for prepar- 
ing a WBS is as follows: 

Level 1 WBS: This contains only the final goal of the project. This 
item should be identifiable directly as an organizational budget 
item. 

Level 2 WBS: This level contains the major subsections of the project. 
These subsections are usually identified by their contiguous location 
or by their related purposes. 

Level 3 WBS: This level contains definable components of the level 2 
subsections. In technical terms, this may be referred to as the finite 
element level of the project. 

Subsequent levels of WBS are constructed in more specific details depend- 
ing on the span of control desired. If a complete WBS becomes too crowded, 
separate WBS layouts may be drawn for the Level 2 components. A statement 
of work (SOW) or WBS summary should accompany the WBS. The SOW is 
a narrative of the work to be done. It should include the objectives of the 
work, its scope, resource requirements, tentative due date, feasibility state- 
ments, and so on. A good analysis of the WBS structure will make it easier 
to perform scope monitoring, scope verification, and control project work 
later on in the project. Figure 3.5 shows an example of a WBS structure for a 
hypothetical design project. 



Project Organization Structures 

Project organization structure provides the framework for implementing 
a project across functional units of an organization. Project organization 
structure facilitates integration of functions through cooperation and syn- 
ergy. Project organizational structures are used to achieve coordinated and 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



59 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Level 3 



Level 4 



Design 
project 

I 



Hardware 
item 1.1 



Software 
item 1.2 



Test 
item 1.3 



Item 1.1.1 



Item 1.1.2 



Item 1.2.2 



Item 1.3.1 



1— Item 1.1.1.1 



I— Item 1.2.2.1 &lt;— Item 1.3.1 



I— Item 1.1.1.1.1 



Item 1.1.1.1.1 

-(a) 



Item 1.1.1.1.1 

-(b) 



Item 1.1.1.1.1 

-(b)-l 



FIGURE 3.5 

Example of WBS structure for a design project. 

cross-functional efforts to accomplish organizational tasks. There are three 
basic types of organizational structures for projects: 

1. Functional organization structure 

2. Projectized organization structure 

3. Matrix organization structure 

However, some specialized or customized adaptations of the three basic 
structures are used in practice to meet unique project situations. Before 
selecting an organizational structure, the project team should assess the 
nature of the job to be performed and its requirements, as contained in the 
WBS. The structure may be defined in terms of functional specializations, 
departmental proximity, standard management boundaries, operational 
relationships, or product requirements. 



Traditional Formal Organization Structures 

Many organizations use the traditional formal or classical organization struc- 
tures, which show hierarchical relationships between individuals or teams 



60 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



of individuals. Traditional formal organizational structures are effective 
in service enterprises because groups with similar functional responsibili- 
ties are clustered at the same level of the structure. A formal organizational 
structure represents the officially sanctioned structure of a functional area. 
An informal organizational structure, on the other hand, develops when 
people organize themselves in an unofficial way to accomplish a project 
objective. The informal organization is often very subtle in that not everyone 
in the organization is aware of its existence. Both formal and informal orga- 
nizations exist within every project. Positive characteristics of the traditional 
formal organizational structure include the following: 

• Availability of broad manpower base 

• Identifiable technical line of control 

• Grouping of specialists to share technical knowledge 

• Collective line of responsibility 

• Possibility of assigning personnel to several different projects 

• Clear hierarchy for supervision 

• Continuity and consistency of functional disciplines 

• Possibility for the establishment of departmental policies, proce- 
dures, and missions 

However, the traditional formal structure does have some shortcomings as 
summarized below: 

• No one individual is directly responsible for the total project. 

• Project-oriented planning may be impeded. 

• There may not be a clear line of reporting up from the lower levels. 

• Coordination is complex. 

• A higher level of cooperation is required between adjacent levels. 

• The strongest functional group may wrongfully claim project authority. 

Functional Organization 

The most common type of formal organization is known as the functional 
organization, whereby people are organized into groups dedicated to par- 
ticular functions. This structure highlights the need for specialized areas of 
responsibilities, such as marketing, finance, accounting, engineering, produc- 
tion, design, and administration. In a functional organization, personnel are 
grouped by job function. While organizational integration is usually desired 
in an enterprise, there still exists a need to have service differentiation. This 
helps to distinguish between business units and functional responsibilities. 
Depending on the size and the type of auxiliary activities involved, sev- 
eral minor, but supporting, functional units can be developed for a project. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



61 



R&amp;D 



Basic research projects 
Applied research projects 
New technology projects 
Technology transfer 



VP 



CIMS projects 
Capacity planning 
Materials analysis 
Facility layout 



President 



VP 



Health programs 
Training projects 
Recruiting programs 
Recreational facilities 



VP 



New products 
Advertising 

' Product support ~~ Equipment 
Expansion Acqusition 



VP 



Work measurement 
Quality assurance 



VP 



Product design 
Installations 
Maintenance 
Equipment 



FIGURE 3.6 

Functional organization structure. 

Projects that are organized along functional lines normally reside in a specific 
department or area of specialization. The project home office or headquarters 
is located in the specific functional department. Figure 3.6 shows examples of 
projects that are organized under the functional structure. The advantages of 
a functional organization structure are presented below: 

• Improved accountability 

• Personnel within the structure have one clear chain of command 
(supervision) 

• Discernible lines of control 

• Individuals perform projects only within the boundaries of their 
respective functions 

• Flexibility in manpower utilization 

• Enhanced comradeship of technical staff 

• Improved productivity of specially skilled personnel 

• Potential for staff advancement along functional path 

• Ability of the home office to serve as a refuge for project problems 

The disadvantages of a functional organization structure include: 

• Potential division of attention between project goals and regular 
functions 

• Conflict between project objectives and regular functions 



62 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Poor coordination similar project responsibilities 

• Unreceptive attitudes on the part of the surrogate department 

• Multiple layers of management 

• Lack of concentrated effort 

Projectized Organization 

Another approach to organizing a project is to use the end product or goal of 
the project as the determining factor for personnel structure. This is known 
as the projectized structured, but often referred to as pure project organi- 
zation or product organization, whereby the project is organized around a 
particular product (e.g., project deliverable, goal). The project is set up as a 
unique entity within the parent organization. It has its own dedicated tech- 
nical staff and administration. It is linked to the rest of the system through 
progress reports, organizational policies, procedures, and funding. The inter- 
face between product-organized projects and other elements of the organiza- 
tion may be strict or liberal, depending on the organization. An example of 
a pure project organization is shown in Figure 3.7. Projects A, B, C, and D in 
the figure may directly represent product types A, B, C, and D. Projectized 
organization structure is suitable for two categories of companies: 

1. Companies that use management-by-projects as a philosophy of 
their operations 

2. Companies that derive most of their revenues from performing proj- 
ects for a fee 

Such organizations normally have performance systems in place to 
monitor, track, and control projects. For these companies, the personnel are 
often colocated. 



Project A 
manager 



Design 



Manuf. 



Program manager 



Project B 
manager 



Design 



Manuf. 



Project C 
manager 



Project D 
manager 



Design 



Manuf. 



Design 



Manuf. 



FIGURE 3.7 

Projectized organization structure. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 63 



The project organization is common in industries that have multiple 
product lines. Unlike the functional, the project organization decentralizes 
functions. It creates a unit consisting of specialized skills around a given 
project or product. Sometimes referred to as a team, task force, or product 
group, the project organization is common in public, research, and manufac- 
turing organizations where specially organized and designated groups are 
assigned specific functions. A major advantage of the product organization 
is that it gives the project members a feeling of dedication to and identifica- 
tion with a particular goal. 

A possible shortcoming of the project organization is the requirement that 
the product group be sufficiently funded to be able to stand alone. The prod- 
uct group may be viewed as an ad hoc unit that is formed for the purpose 
of a specific product. The personnel involved in the project are dedicated to 
the particular mission at hand. At the conclusion of the mission (e.g., prod- 
uct phase-out), the personnel may be reassigned to other projects. Product 
organization can facilitate the most diverse and flexible grouping of project 
participants. It has the following advantages: 

Simplicity of structure 

Unity of project purpose 

Localization of project failures 

Condensed and focused communication lines 

Full authority of the project manager 

Quicker decisions due to centralized authority 

Skill development due to project specialization 

Improved motivation, commitment, and concentration 

Flexibility in determining time, cost, performance trade-offs 

Project team's reporting directly to one project manager or boss 

Ability of individuals to acquire and maintain expertise on a given 
project 

The disadvantages of product organization are: 

• Narrow view on the part of project personnel (as opposed to a global 
organizational view) 

• The same functional expertise is replicated (or duplicated) in mul- 
tiple projects 

• Mutually exclusive allocation of resources (one worker to one project) 

• Duplication of efforts on different but similar projects 

• Monopoly of organizational resources 

• Project team members may have concerns about life-after-the-project 

• Reduced skill diversification 



64 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Another disadvantage of the product organization is the difficulty 
supervisors have in assessing the technical competence of individual team 
members. Since managers may supervise functional personnel in fields for- 
eign to them, it is difficult for them to assess technical capability. For exam- 
ple, a project manager in a projectized structure may supervise personnel 
from accounting, engineering, design, manufacturing, sales, marketing, and 
so on. Many major organizations face this problem. 



Matrix Organization Structure 

The matrix organization structure is a blend of functional and projectized 
structures. It is a frequently used organization structure in business and 
industry. It is used where there is multiple managerial accountability and 
responsibility for a project. It combines the advantages of the traditional 
structure and the product organization structure. The hybrid configuration of 
the matrix structure facilitates maximum resource utilization and increased 
performance within time, cost, and performance constraints. There are usu- 
ally two chains of command involving both horizontal and vertical report- 
ing lines. The horizontal line deals with the functional line of responsibility 
while the vertical line deals with the project line of responsibility. An exam- 
ple of a matrix structure is shown in Figure 3.8. The personnel along each 
vertical line of reporting cross over horizontally to work on the "matrixed" 
project. The matrix structure is said to be strong if it is more closely aligned 





Chief 
executive officer 








1 










1 










Director of 
projects 




Finance 
department 




Manufacturing 
department 




Engineering 
department 








► t 




I 


1 
'roject responsibilit 


V 






Project A 








a 




Vertical/horizontal 
coordination 










3 

o 




Project B 

























Project C 




C 
=1 




IU 












I 





































FIGURE 3.8 

Matrix organization structure. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 65 



with the projectized organization structure, and it is said to be a weak matrix 
structure if it is more closely aligned to a functional structure. A balanced 
matrix structure blends projectized and functional structures equally. 
Advantages of matrix organization include the following: 

Good team interaction 

Consolidation of objectives 

Multilateral flow of information 

Lateral mobility for job advancement 

Individuals have an opportunity to work on a variety of projects 

Efficient sharing and utilization of resources 

Reduced project cost due to sharing of personnel 

Continuity of functions after project completion 

Stimulating interactions with other functional teams 

Functional lines rally to support the project efforts 

Each person has a "home" office after project completion 

Company knowledge base is equally available to all projects 

Some of the disadvantages of matrix organization are summarized below: 

• Matrix response time may be slow for fast-paced projects 

• Each project organization operates independently 

• Overhead cost due to additional lines of command 

• Potential conflict of project priorities 

• Problems inherent in having multiple bosses 

• Complexity of the structure 

Traditionally industrial projects are conducted in serial functional imple- 
mentations such as R&amp;D, engineering, manufacturing, and marketing. At 
each stage, unique specifications and work patterns may be used without 
consulting the preceding and succeeding phases. The consequence is that 
the end product may not possess the original intended characteristics. For 
example, the first project in the series might involve the production of one 
component while the subsequent projects might involve the production of 
other components. The composite product may not achieve the desired per- 
formance because the components were not designed and produced from 
a unified point of view. The major appeal of matrix organization is that it 
attempts to provide synergy within groups in an organization. Table 3.2 
summarizes the levels of responsibilities and project characteristics under 
different organizational structures. In a projectized structure, the project 
manager enjoys high to almost total power for project authority and resource 



66 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



TABLE 3.2 

Levels of Project Characteristics under Different Organizational Structures 







Organizational Structures 




Project 




Weak 


Balanced 


Strong 




Characteristics 


Functional 


Matrix 


Matrix 


Matrix 


Projectized 


Project manager's 


Low 


Limited 


Low to 


Moderate 


High 


authority 






moderate 


to high 




Resource 


Low 


Limited 


Low to 


Moderate 


High 


availability 






moderate 


to high 




Control of project 


Functional 


Functional 


Mixed 


Project 


Project 


budget 


manager 


manager 




manager 


manager 


Role of project 


Part-time 


Part-time 


Part-time 


Full-time 


Full-time 


manager 












Project management 


Part-time 


Part-time 


Part-time 


Full-time 


Full-time 


staff 













availability, whereas he or she will have little power on project authority and 
resource availability under a functional structure. 



Elements of a Project Plan 

A project plan represents the roadmap for executing a project. It contains the 
outline of the series actions needed to accomplish the project goal. Project 
planning determines how to initiate a project and execute its objectives. It 
may be a simple statement of a project goal or it may be a detailed account of 
procedures to be followed during the project life cycle. In a project plan, all 
roles and responsibilities must be clearly defined. A project plan is not a bar 
chart or Gantt chart. The project manager must be versatile enough to have 
knowledge of most of the components of a project plan. The usual compo- 
nents of a detailed project plan include the following: 

• Scope planning 

• Scope definition 

• WBS 

• Activity definition 

• Activity sequencing 

• Activity resource estimating 

• Activity duration estimating 

• Schedule development 

• Cost estimating 

• Cost budgeting 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 67 



Quality plan 

Human resource plan 

Communications plan 

Risk management plan 

Risk identification 

Qualitative and quantitative risk analysis 

Risk response planning 

Contingencies 

Purchase plan 

Acquisition plan 

Contracting plan 



Integrated Systems Approach to STEP Projects 

Project management tools for STEP projects can be classified into three major 
categories described below: 

1. Qualitative tools: These are the managerial tools that aid in the 
interpersonal and organizational processes required for project 
management. 

2. Quantitative tools: These are analytical techniques that aid in the 
computational aspects of project management. 

3. Computer tools: These are computer software and hardware tools 
that simplify the process of planning, organizing, scheduling, and 
controlling a project. Software tools can help in with both the qual- 
itative and quantitative analyses needed for project management. 



Managing Project Requirements 

It is often said that Henry Ford offered his Model T automobile customers 
only one color option by saying that customers could have "any color they 
want, as long as it is black." But the fact is that Ford initially offered three 
colors: green, bright red, and green from 1908 through 1914. But when his 
production technology advanced to the stage of mass production on mov- 
ing assembly line, the new process required a fast-drying paint, and only 
one particular black paint pigment met the requirements. Thus, as a result 
of the emergence of fast-moving mass production lines, Ford was forced to 
limit color options to black only. This led to the need for the famous quote. 
The black-only era spanned the period from 1914 through 1925, when fur- 
ther painting advances made it possible to have more color options. This 
represents a classic example of how technology limitations might dictate the 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 




Project plan 

Define goals and objectives 

Write mission statement 

Write statement of work 



Management 

approaches 

Project organization 

Analytical tools 

CPM, PERT 
Systems model 



XZ 



Optimization models 

Model development 

-l\^ Solution technique 

Output interpretation 

Cost optimization 

Schedule 

Optimization 



I 



Computer applications 

Software selection 

Data organization 

Simulation 

Schedule generation 

Tracking and reporting 



Merge results 



^Z 



Revise plan, modify model, update software run 




FIGURE 3.9 

Flowchart of integrated STEP project management. 

execution of project requirements. In oil and gas project management, an 
organization must remain flexible with operational choices as reflected in 
the flowchart in Figure 3.9. 



Project Integration 



Project integration management specifies how the various parts of a project 
come together to make up the complete project. This knowledge area recog- 
nizes the importance of linking several aspects of a project into an integrated 
whole. This section emphasizes the importance of "togetherness" in any project 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 69 



environment. Project integration management area includes the processes and 
activities needed to identify, define, combine, unify, and coordinate the various 
processes and project activities. The traditional concepts of systems analysis 
are applicable to project processes. The definition of a project system and its 
components refers to the collection of interrelated elements organized for the 
purpose of achieving a common goal. The elements are organized to work syn- 
ergistically together to generate a unified output that is greater than the sum of 
the individual outputs of the components. The harmony of project integration 
is evident in the characteristic symbol that this book uses to denote this area of 
project management knowledge. 

While the knowledge areas of project management, as discussed in 
the preceding sections, overlap and can be implemented in alternate 
orders, it is still apparent that project integration management is the first 
step of the project effort. This is particularly based on the fact that the proj- 
ect charter and the project scope statement are developed under the project 
integration process. In order to achieve a complete and unified execution 
of a project, both qualitative and quantitative skills must come into play 



Stepwise Project Integration 

The integration component of the body of knowledge consists of the ele- 
ments shown below: 

Step 1: Develop project charter 
Step 2: Develop preliminary project scope 
Step 3: Develop project management plan 
Step 4: Direct and manage project execution 
Step 5: Monitor and control project work 
Step 6: Perform integrated change control 
Step 7: Close project 

The seven elements in the block diagram are carried out across the process 
groups presented earlier. The overlay of the elements and the process groups 
are shown in Table 3.3. 

In addition to the standard PMBOK inputs, tools, techniques, and outputs, 
the project team will add in-house items of interest to the steps presented in 
this section. Such in-house items are summarized below: 

• Inputs: Other in-house (custom) factors of relevance and interest 

• Tools and techniques: Other in-house (custom) tools and techniques 

• Outputs: Other in-house outputs, reports, and data inferences of 
interest to the organization 



70 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



TABLE 3.3 

Implementation of Project Integration Elements across Process Groups 







Monitoring and 




Initiating 


Planning 


Executing Controlling 


Closing 


Project 1. Develop 


3. Develop project 


4. Direct and 5. Monitor and 


7. Close 


integration project charter 


management 


manage control 


project 


2. Develop 


plan 


project project work 




preliminary 




execution 6. Integrated 




project scope 




change 
control 





Table 3.4 shows the input-to-output items for developing project charter. 
The tabular format is useful for explicitly identifying what the project ana- 
lyst needs to do or use for each step of the project management process. 
Tables 3.5 through 3.10 present the input-to-output entries for the other steps 
under integration management. 



Step 1: Develop Project Charter 

Project charter formally authorizes a project. It is a document that provides 
authority to the project manager and it is usually issued by a project initia- 
tor or sponsor external to the project organization. The purpose of a charter 
is to define at a high level what the project is about, what the project will 
deliver, what resources are needed, what resources are available, and how 
the project is justified. The charter also represents an organizational commit- 
ment to dedicate the time and resources to the project. The charter should be 
shared with all stakeholders as a part of the communication requirement for 
the project. Cooperating stakeholders will not only sign-off on the project, 

TABLE 3.4 

Tools and Techniques for Developing Project Charter within 
Integration Management 

Step 1: Develop Project Charter 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project contract (if applicable) 
Project statement of work 
Enterprise environmental 

factors 
Organizational process assets 
Other in-house (custom) 

factors of relevance and 

interest 



Project selection methods 
Analytic hierarchy process (AHP) 
Project management 

methodology 
Project management information 

system 
Expert judgment 
Balance scorecard 
Process control charts 
Other in-house (custom) tools and 

techniques 



Project charter 

Other in-house outputs, 
reports, and data 
inferences of interest 
to the organization 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



71 



TABLE 3.5 

Tools and Techniques for Developing Preliminary Project Scope Statement 
within Integration Management 

Step 2: Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project charter 
Project statement of work 
Enterprise environmental factors 
Organizational process assets 
Other in-house (custom) factors 
of relevance and interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Expert judgment 
CMMI (capability maturity 

model integration) 
Critical chain 
Process control charts 
Other in-house (custom) tools 

and techniques 



Preliminary project scope 

statement 
Other in-house outputs, 

reports, and data 

inferences of interest to 

the organization 



TABLE 3.6 

Tools and Techniques for Developing Project Management Plan within 
Integration Management 

Step 3: Develop Project Management Plan 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Preliminary project scope statement 
Project management processes 
Enterprise environmental factors 
Organizational process assets 
Other in-house (custom) factors of 
relevance and interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Expert judgment 



Project management 
plan 



TABLE 3.7 

Tools and Techniques for Managing Project Execution within 
Integration Management 

Step 4: Direct and Manage Project Execution 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project management plan 
Approved corrective actions 
Approved preventive actions 
Approved change requests 
Approved defect repair 
Validated defect repair 
Administrative closure 

procedure 
Other in-house (custom) 

factors of relevance and 

interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Process flow diagram 
Other in-house (custom) 

tools and techniques 



Project deliverables 
Requested changes 
Implemented change requests 
Implemented corrective actions 
Implemented preventive actions 
Implemented defect repair 
Work performance information 
Other in-house outputs, reports, 

and data inferences of interest 

to the organization 



72 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



TABLE 3.8 

Tools and Techniques for Monitoring and Controlling Project Work 
within Integration Management 

Step 5: Monitor and Control Project Work 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project management plan 
Work performance information 
Rejected change requests 
Other in-house (custom) factors 
of relevance and interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Earned value management 
Expert judgment 
Other in-house (custom) 

tools and techniques 



Recommended corrective 

actions 
Recommended preventive 

actions 
Forecasts 

Recommended defect repair 
Requested changes 
Other in-house outputs, 

reports, and data 

inferences of interest to the 

organization 



TABLE 3.9 

Tools and Techniques for Integrated Change Control within Integration 
Management 



Inputs 



Step 6: Perform Integrated Change Control 
Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project management plan 
Requested changes 
Work performance 

information 
Recommended preventive 

actions 
Recommended corrective 

actions 
Deliverables 
Other in-house (custom) 

factors of relevance and 

interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Expert judgment 
Other in-house (custom) 

tools and techniques 



Approved change requests 
Rejected change requests 
Update project management plan 
Update project scope statement 
Approved corrective actions 
Approved preventive actions 
Approved defect repair 
Validated defect repair 
Deliverables 
Other in-house outputs, reports, and 

data inferences of interest to the 

organization 



but also make personal pledges to support the project. Projects are usually 
chartered by an enterprise, a government agency, a company, a program 
organization, or a portfolio organization in response to one or more of the 
following business opportunities or organizational problems: 

• Market demand 

• Response to regulatory development 

• Customer request 

• Business need 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



73 



TABLE 3.10 

Tools and Techniques for Closing Project within Integration Management 



Inputs 



Step 7: Close Project 
Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Project management plan 
Contract documentation 
Enterprise environmental factors 
Organizational process assets 
Work performance information 
Deliverables 

Other in-house (custom) factors 
of relevance and interest 



Project management 

methodology 
Project management 

information system 
Expert judgment 
Other in-house (custom) 

tools and techniques 



Administrative closure 

procedure 
Contract closure procedure 
Final product, service or result 
Updates on organizational 

process assets 
Other in-house outputs, 

reports, and data inferences 

of interest to the organization 



• Exploitation of technological advance 

• Legal requirement 

• Social need 

The driving force for a project charter is the need for an organization 
to make a decision about which projects to authorize to respond to oper- 
ational threats or opportunities. It is desired for a charter to be brief. 
Depending on the size and complexity of a project, the charter should not 
be more than two to three pages. Where additional details are warranted, 
the expatiating details can be provided as addenda to the basic charter 
document. The longer the basic charter, the less the likelihood that every- 
one will read and imbibe the contents. So, brevity and conciseness are 
desired virtues of good project charters. The charter should succinctly 
establish the purpose of the project, the participants, and general vision 
for the project. 

The project charter is used as the basis for developing project plans. While 
it is developed at the outset of a project, a charter should always be fluid. 
It should be reviewed and updated throughout the life of the project. The 
components of the project charter are summarized below: 

• Project overview 

• Assigned project manager and authority level 

• Project requirements 

• Business needs 

• Project purpose, justification, and goals 

• Impact statement 

• Constraints (time, cost, performance) 

• Assumptions 



74 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Project scope 

• Financial implications 

• Project approach (policies, procedures) 

• Project organization 

• Participating organizations and their respective roles and level of 
participation 

• Summary milestone schedule 

• Stakeholder influences 

• Assumptions and constraints (organizational, environmental, 
external) 

• Business plan and expected return on investment (ROI), if applicable 

• Summary budget 

The project charter does not include the project plan. Planning documents, 
which may include project schedule, quality plan, staff plan, communication 
hierarchy, financial plan, and risk plan, should be prepared and dissemi- 
nated separately from the charter. 

• Project overview 

• The project overview provides a brief summary of the entire 
project charter. It may provide a brief history of the events that 
led to the project, an explanation of why the project was initi- 
ated, a description of project intent and the identity of the origi- 
nal project owner. 

• Project goals 

• Project goals identify the most significant reasons for perform- 
ing a project. Goals should describe improvements the project is 
expected to accomplish along with who will benefit from these 
improvements. This section should explain what various bene- 
factors will be able to accomplish due to the project. Note that 
Triple C approach requires these details as a required step to 
securing cooperation. 

• Impact statement 

• The impact statement identifies the influence the project may 
have on the business, operations, schedule, other projects, cur- 
rent technology, and existing applications. While these topics are 
beyond the domain of this project, each of these items should be 
raised for possible action. 

• Constraints and assumptions 

• Constraints and assumptions identify any deliberate or implied 
limitations or restrictions placed on the project along with any 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 75 



current or future environment the project must accommodate. 
These factors will influence many project decisions and strate- 
gies. The potential impact of each constraint or assumptions 
should be identified. 

Project scope 

• Project scope defines the operational boundaries for the proj- 
ect. Specific scope components are the areas or functions to be 
impacted by the project and the work that will be performed. 
The project scope should identify both what is within the scope 
of the project and what is outside the scope of the project. 

Project objectives 

• Project objectives identify expected deliverables from the project 
and the criteria that must be satisfied before the project is con- 
sidered complete. 

Financial summary 

• The financial summary provides a recap of expected costs and 
benefits due to the project. These factors should be more fully 
defined in the cost-benefit analysis of the project. Project finan- 
cials must be reforecast during the life of the effort. 

Project approach 

• Project approach identifies the general strategy for completing 
the project and explains any methods or processes, particularly 
policies and procedures that will be used during the project. 

Project organization 

• The project organization identifies the roles and responsibili- 
ties needed to create a meaningful and responsive structure that 
enables the project to be successful. Project organization must 
identify the people who will play each assigned role. At mini- 
mum, this section should identify who plays the roles of project 
owner, project manager, and core project team. 

• A project owner is required for each project. 

- This role must be filled by one or more individuals who are 
the fiscal trustee(s) for the project to the larger organiza- 
tion. This person considers the global impact of the project 
and deems it worthy of the required expenditure of money 
and time. The project owner communicates the vision for 
the effort and certifies the initial project charter and project 
plan. Should changes be required, the project owner con- 
firms these changes and any influence on the project charter 
and project plan. When project decisions cannot be made at 
the team level, the project owner must resolve these issues. 
The project owner must play an active role throughout the 



76 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



project, especially ensuring that needed resources have been 
committed to the project and remain available. 

• A project manager is required for each project. 

- The project manager is responsible for initiating, planning, 
executing, and controlling the total project effort. Members 
of the project team report to the project manager for project 
assignments and are accountable to the project manager for 
the completion of their assigned work. 

Definition of Inputs to Step 1: 

Contract: A contract is a contractual agreement between the organiza- 
tion performing the project and the organizing requesting the proj- 
ect. It is treated as an input if the project is being done for an external 
customer. 

Project statement of work (SOW): This is a narrative description of prod- 
ucts or services to be supplied by the project. For internal projects, 
it is provided by the project initiator or sponsor. For external proj- 
ects, it is provided by the customer as part of the bid document. For 
example, request for proposal, request for information, request for 
bid, or contract statements may contain specific work to be done. The 
SOW indicates the following: 

• Business need based on required training, market demand, tech- 
nological advancement, legal requirement, government regula- 
tions, industry standards, or trade consensus 

• Product scope description, which documents project require- 
ments and characteristics of the product or service that the proj- 
ect will deliver 

• Strategic plan, which ensures that the project supports organiza- 
tion's strategic goals and business tactical actions 

Enterprise environmental factors: These are factors that impinge upon the 
business environment of the organization. They include organiza- 
tional structure, business culture, governmental standards, industry 
requirements, quality standards, trade agreements, physical infra- 
structure, technical assets, proprietary information, existing human 
resources, personnel administration, internal work authorization 
system, marketplace profile, competition, stakeholder requirements, 
stakeholder risk tolerance levels, commercial obligations, access to 
standardized cost estimating data, industry risk, technology vari- 
ances, product life cycle, and PMIS. 

Organizational process assets: These refer to the business processes 
used within an organization. They include standard processes, 
guidelines, policies, procedures, operational templates, criteria for 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 11 



customizing standards to specific project requirements, organiza- 
tion communication matrix, responsibility matrix, project closure 
guidelines (e.g., sunset clause), financial controls procedure, defect 
management procedures, change control procedures, risk control 
procedures, process for issuing work authorizations, processes for 
approving work authorizations, management of corporate knowl- 
edge base, and so on. 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 1: 

Project selection methods: These methods are used to determine which 
projects an organization will select for implementation. The meth- 
ods can range from basic seat-of-the-pants heuristics to highly com- 
plex analytical techniques. Some examples are benefit measurement 
methods, comparative measure of worth analysis, scoring models, 
benefit contribution, capital rationing approaches, budget allocation 
methods, and graphical analysis tools. Analytical techniques are 
mathematical models that use linear programming, nonlinear pro- 
gramming, dynamic programming, integer programming, multiat- 
tribute optimization, and other algorithmic tools. 

Project management methodology: This defines the set of project manage- 
ment process groups, their collateral processes, and related control 
functions that are combined for implementation for a particular 
project. The methodology may or may not follow a project man- 
agement standard. It may be an adaptation of an existing project 
implementation template. It can also be a formal mature process 
or informal technique that aids in effectively developing a project 
charter. 

PMIS: This is a standardized set of automated tools available within the 
organization and integrated into a system for the purpose of sup- 
porting the generation of a project charter, facilitating feedback as 
the charter is refined, controlling changes to the project charter, or 
releasing the approved document. 

Expert judgment: This is often used to assess the inputs needed to develop 
the project charter. Expert judgment is available from sources such 
as experiential database of the organization, knowledge repository, 
knowledge management practices, knowledge transfer protocol, 
business units within the organization, consultants, stakeholders, 
customers, sponsors, professional organizations, technical associa- 
tions, and industry groups. 

Definition of Output of Step 1: 

Project charter: As defined earlier in this chapter, project charter is a 
formal document that authorizes a project. It provides authority to the 



78 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



project manager and it is usually issued by a project initiator or spon- 
sor external to the project organization. It empowers the project team 
to carry out actions needed to accomplish the end goal of the project. 

Step 2: Develop Preliminary Project Scope Statement 

Project scope presents a definition of what needs to be done. It specifies the 
characteristics and boundaries of the project and its associated products 
and services, as well as the methods of acceptance and scope control. Scope 
is developed based on information provided by the projected initiator or 
sponsor. Scope statement includes the following: 

Project and product objectives 

Product characteristics 

Service requirements 

Product acceptance criteria 

Project constraints 

Project assumptions 

Initial project organization 

Initial defined risks 

Schedule milestones 

Initial WBS 

Order-of-magnitude cost estimate 

Project configuration management requirements 

Approval requirements 

Definition of Inputs to Step 2: 

Inputs for Step 2 are the same as defined for Step 1 covering project charter, 
SOW, environmental factors, and organizational process assets. 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 2: 

The tools and techniques for Step 2 are the same as defined for Step 1 and 
cover project management methodology, PMIS, and expert judgment. 

Definition of Output of Step 2: 

The output of Step 2 is the preliminary project scope statement, which was 
defined and described earlier. 

Step 3: Develop Project Management Plan 

A project management plan includes all actions necessary to define, integrate, 
and coordinate all subsidiary and complementing plans into a cohesive proj- 
ect management plan. It defines how the project is executed, monitored and 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 79 



controlled, and closed. The project management plan is updated and revised 
through the integrated change control process. In addition, the process of 
developing project management plan documents the collection of outputs of 
planning processes and includes the following: 

• Project management processes selected by the project management 
team 

• Level of implementation of each selected process 

• Descriptions of tools and techniques to be used for accomplishing 
those processes 

• How selected processes will be used to manage the specific project 

• How work will be executed to accomplish the project objectives 

• How changes will be monitored and controlled 

• How configuration management will be performed 

• How integrity of the performance measurement baselines will be 
maintained and used 

• The requirements and techniques for communication among 
stakeholders 

• The selected project life cycle and, for multiphase projects, the asso- 
ciated project phases 

• Key management reviews for content, extent, and timing 

The project management plan can be a summary or integration of relevant 
subsidiary, auxiliary, and ancillary project plans. All efforts that are expected 
to contribute to the project goal can be linked into the overall project plan, 
each with the appropriate level of detail. Examples of subsidiary plans are 
the following: 

Project scope management plan 
Schedule management plan 
Cost management plan 
Quality management plan 
Process improvement plan 
Staffing management plan 
Communication management plan 
Risk management plan 
Procurement management plan 
Milestone list 
Resource calendar 
Cost baseline 



80 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Quality baseline 

• Risk register 

Definition of Inputs to Step 3: 

Inputs to Step 3 are the same as defined previously and include preliminary 
project scope statement, project management processes, enterprise environ- 
mental factors, and organizational process assets. 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 3: 

The tools and techniques for Step 3 are project management methodology, 
project information system, and expert judgment. Project management 
methodology defines a process that aids a project management team in 
developing and controlling changes to the project plan. PMIS at this step 
covers the following segments: 

• Automated system, which is used by the project team to do the 
following: 

• Support generation of the project management plan 

• Facilitate feedback as the document is developed 

• Control changes to the project management plan 

• Release the approved document 

• Configuration management system, which is a subsystem that 
includes subprocesses for accomplishing the following: 

• Submitting proposed changes 

• Tracking systems for reviewing and authorizing changes 

• Providing a method to validate approved changes 

• Implementing change management system 

• Configuration management system, which forms a collection of for- 
mal procedures used to apply technical and administrative over- 
sight to do the following: 

• Identify and document functional and physical characteristics of 
a product or component 

• Control any changes to such characteristics 

• Record and report each change and its implementation status 

• Support audit of the products or components to verify confor- 
mance to requirements 

• Change control system is the segment of PMIS that provides a collec- 
tion of formal procedures that define how project deliverables and 
documentation are controlled. 

Expert judgment, the third tool for Step 3, is applied to develop technical 
and management details to be included in the project management plan. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 81 



Definition of Output of Step 3: 

The output of Step 3 is the project management plan. 

Step 4: Direct and Manage Project Execution 

Step 4 requires the project manager and project team to perform multiple 
actions to execute the project plan successfully. Some of the required activi- 
ties for project execution are summarized below: 

Perform activities to accomplish project objectives 

Expend effort and spend funds 

Staff, train, and manage project team members 

Obtain quotation, bids, offers, or proposals as appropriate 

Implement planned methods and standards 

Create, control, verify, and validate project deliverables 

Manage risks and implement risk response activities 

Manage sellers 

Adapt approved changes into scope, plans, and environment 

Establish and manage external and internal communication channels 

Collect project data and report cost, schedule, technical and quality 
progress and status information to facilitate forecasting 

• Collect and document lessons learned and implement approved 
process improvement activities 

The process of directing and managing project execution also requires 
implementation of the following: 

• Approved corrective actions that will bring anticipated project per- 
formance into compliance with the plan 

• Approved preventive actions to reduce the probability of potential 
negative consequences 

• Approved defect repair requests to correct product defects during 
quality process 

Definition of Inputs to Step 4: 

Inputs to Step 4 are summarized as follows: 

• Project management plan. 

• Approved corrective actions: These are documented, authorized direc- 
tions required to bring expected future project performance into 
conformance with the project management plan. 



82 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Approved change requests: These include documented, authorized 
changes to expand or contract project scope. Can also modify poli- 
cies, project management plans, procedures, costs, budgets, or revise 
schedules. Change requests are implemented by the project team. 

• Approved defect repair: This is documented, authorized request for 
product correction of defect found during the quality inspection or 
the audit process. 

• Validated defect repair: This is notification that reinspected repaired 
items have either been accepted or rejected. 

• Administrative closure procedure: This documents all the activities, 
interactions, and related roles and responsibilities needed in execut- 
ing the administrative closure procedure for the project. 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 4: 

The tools and techniques for Step 4 are project management methodology 
and PMIS, and they were previously defined. 

Definition of Outputs of Step 4: 

• Deliverables 

• Requested changes 

• Implemented change requests 

• Implemented corrective actions 

• Implemented preventive actions 

• Implemented defect repair 

• Work performance information 

Step 5: Monitor and Control Project Work 

No organization can be strategic without being quantitative. It is through 
quantitative measures that a project can be tracked, measured, assessed, and 
controlled. The need for monitoring and control can be evident in the request 
for quantification (RFQ) that some project funding agencies use. Some quan- 
tifiable performance measures are schedule outcome, cost effectiveness, 
response time, number of reworks, and lines of computer codes developed. 
Monitoring and controlling are performed to monitor project processes asso- 
ciated with initiating, planning, executing, and closing and is concerned 
with the following: 

• Comparing actual performance against plan 

• Assessing performance to determine whether corrective or preven- 
tive actions are required, and then recommending those actions as 
necessary 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 83 



• Analyzing, tracking, and monitoring project risks to make sure 
risks are identified, status is reported, and response plans are being 
executed 

• Maintaining an accurate timely information base concerning the 
project's products and associated documentation 

• Providing information to support status reporting, progress mea- 
surement, and forecasting 

• Providing forecasts to update current cost and schedule information 

• Monitoring implementation of approved changes 

Definition of Inputs to Step 5: 

Inputs to Step 5 include the following: 

• Project management plan 

• Work performance plan 

• Rejected change requests 

• Change requests 

• Supporting documentation 

• Change review status showing disposition of rejected change 
requests 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 5: 

• Project management methodology. 

• PMIS. 

• Earned value technique: This measures performance as project 
moves from initiation through closure. It provides means to forecast 
future performance based on past performance. 

• Expert judgment. 

Definition of Outputs of Step 5: 

• Recommended corrective actions: Documented recommendations 
required to bring expected future project performance into confor- 
mance with the project management plan 

• Recommended preventive actions: Documented recommendations that 
reduce the probability of negative consequences associated with 
project risks 

• Forecasts: Estimates or predictions of conditions and events in the 
project's future based on information available at the time of the 
forecast 



84 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Recommended defect repair: Some defects found during quality inspec- 
tion and audit process recommended for correction 

• Requested changes 

Step 6: Integrated Change Control 

Integrated change control is performed from project inception through com- 
pletion. It is required because projects rarely run according to plan. Major 
components of integrated change control include the following: 

• Identifying when a change needs to occur or when a change has 
occurred 

• Amending factors that circumvent change control procedures 

• Reviewing and approving requested changes 

• Managing and regulating flow of approved changes 

• Maintaining and approving recommended corrective and preven- 
tive actions 

• Controlling and updating scope, cost, budget, schedule, and quality 
requirements based upon approved changes 

• Documenting the complete impact of requested changes 

• Validating defect repair 

• Controlling project quality to standards based on quality reports 

Combining configuration management system with integrated change 
control includes identifying, documenting, and controlling changes to the 
baseline. Project-wide application of the configuration management system, 
including change control processes, accomplishes three major objectives: 

• Establishes evolutionary method to consistently identify and request 
changes to established baselines and to assess the value and effec- 
tiveness of those changes 

• Provides opportunities to continuously validate and improve the 
project by considering the impact of each change 

• Provides the mechanism for the project management team to consis- 
tently communicate all changes to the stakeholders 

Integrated change control process includes some specific activities of the 
configuration management as summarized below: 

• Configuration identification: This provides the basis from which the 
configuration of products is defined and verified, products and 
documents are labeled, changes are managed, and accountability is 
maintained. 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 85 



• Configuration status accounting: This involves capturing, storing, and 
accessing configuration information needed to manage products 
and product information effectively. 

• Configuration verification and auditing: This involves confirming that 
performance and functional requirements defined in the configura- 
tion documentation have been satisfied. 

Under integrated change control, every documented requested change 
must be either accepted or rejected by some authority within the project 
management team or an external organization representing the initiator, 
sponsor, or customer. Integrated change control can, possibly, be controlled 
by a change control board. 

Definition of Inputs to Step 6: 

The inputs to Step 6 include the following items, which were all described 
earlier: 

• Project management plan 

• Requested changes 

• Work performance information 

• Recommended preventive actions 

• Deliverables 

Definition of Tools and Techniques for Step 6: 

• Project management methodology: This defines a process that helps a 
project management team in implementing integrated change con- 
trol for the project. 

• PMIS: This is an automated system used by the team as an aid for the 
implementation of an integrated change control process for the proj- 
ect. It also facilitates feedback for the project and controls changes 
across the project. 

• Expert judgment: This refers to the process whereby the project team 
uses stakeholders with expert judgment on the change control board 
to control and approve all requested changes to any aspect of the 
project. 

Definition of Outputs of Step 6: 

The outputs of Step 6 include the following: 

• Approved change requested 

• Rejected change requests 

• Project management plan (updates) 

• Project scope statement (updates) 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Approved corrective actions 

• Approved preventive actions 

• Approved defect repair 

• Validated defect repair 

• Deliverables 

Step 7: Close Project 

At its completion, a project must be formally closed. This involves perform- 
ing the project closure portion of the project management plan or closure of 
a phase of a multiphase project. There are two main procedures developed to 
establish interactions necessary to perform the closure function: 

• Administrative closure procedure: This provides details of all activi- 
ties, interactions, and related roles and responsibilities involved in 
executing the administrative closure of the project. It also covers 
activities needed to collect project records, analyze project success 
or failure, gather lessons learned, and archive project information. 

• Contract closure procedure: This involves both product verification 
and administrative closure for any existing contract agreements. 
Contract closure procedure is an input to the close contract process. 

Definition of Inputs to Step 7: 

The inputs to Step 7 are the following: 

• Project management plan. 

• Contract documentation: This is an input used to perform the 
contract closure process and includes the contract itself as well as 
changes to the contract and other documentation, such as technical 
approach, product description, or deliverable acceptance criteria and 
procedures. 

• Enterprise environmental factors. 

• Organizational process assets. 

• Work performance information. 

• Deliverables, as previously described, and also as approved by the 
integrated change control process. 

Definition of Tools and Techniques of Step 7: 

• Project management methodology 

• PMIS 

• Expert judgment 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 87 



Definition of Outputs of Step 7: 

• Administrative closure procedure 

• Procedures to transfer the project products or services to pro- 
duction and/or operations are developed and established at this 
stage 

• This stage covers a step-by-step methodology for administrative 
closure that addresses the following: 

- Actions and activities to define the stakeholder approval 
requirements for changes and all levels of deliverables 

- Actions and activities confirm project has met all sponsor, 
customer, and other stakeholders' requirements 

- Actions and activities to verify that all deliverables have been 
provided and accepted 

- Actions and activities to validate completion and exit criteria 
for the project 

• Contract closure procedure 

• This stage provides a step-by-step methodology that addresses 
the terms and conditions of the contracts and any required com- 
pletion or exit criteria for contract closure 

• Actions performed at this stage formally close all contracts asso- 
ciated with the completed project 

• Final product, service, or result 

• Formal acceptance and handover of the final product, service, or 
result that the project was authorized to provide 

• Formal statement confirming that the terms of the contract have 
been met 

• Organizational process assets (updates) 

• Development of the index and location of project documentation 
using the configuration management system 

• Formal acceptance documentation, which formally indicates the 
customer or sponsor has officially accepted the deliverables 

• Project files, which contain all documentation resulting from the 
project activities 

• Project closure documents, which consist of a formal documen- 
tation indicating the completion of the project and transfer of 
deliverables 

• Historical information, which is transferred to knowledge base 
of lessons learned for use by future projects 

• Traceability of process steps 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Project Sustainability 

Project efforts must be sustained for a project to achieve the intended end 
results in the long run. Project sustainability is not often addressed in project 
management, but it is very essential particularly for projects in the oil and 
gas industry. 

Sustainability, in ordinary usage, refers to the capacity to maintain a cer- 
tain process or state indefinitely. In day-to-day parlance, the concept of sus- 
tainability is applied more specifically to living organisms and systems, 
particularly environmental systems. As applied to the human community, 
sustainability has been expressed as meeting the needs of the present with- 
out compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
The term has its roots in ecology as the ability of an ecosystem to main- 
tain ecological processes, functions, biodiversity, and productivity into the 
future. When applied to systems, sustainability brings out the conventional 
attributes of a system in terms of having the following capabilities: 

• Self-regulation 

• Self-adjustment 

• Self-correction 

• Self-recreation 

To be sustainable, nature's resources must only be used at a rate at which 
they can be replenished naturally. Within the environmental science com- 
munity, there is a strong belief that the world is progressing on an unsustain- 
able path because the Earth's limited natural resources are being consumed 
more rapidly than they are being replaced by nature. Consequently, a collec- 
tive human effort to keep human use of natural resources within the sustain- 
able development aspect of the Earth's finite resource limits has become an 
issue of urgent importance. Unsustainable management of natural resources 
puts the Earth's future in jeopardy. 

Sustainability has become a widespread, controversial, and complex issue 
that is applied in many different ways, including the following: 

• Sustainability of ecological systems or biological organization (e.g., 
wetlands, prairies, forests) 

• Sustainability of human organization (e.g., ecovillages, eco-munici- 
palities, sustainable cities) 

• Sustainability of human activities and disciplines (e.g., sustainable 
agriculture, sustainable architecture, sustainable energy) 

• Sustainability of projects (e.g., operations, resource allocation, cost 
control) 

For project integration, the concept of sustainability can be applied to facil- 
itate collaboration across project entities. The process of achieving continued 



Project Management Body of Knowledge 



improvement in operations, in a sustainable way, requires that engineers 
create new technologies that facilitate interdisciplinary thought exchanges. 
Under the project methodology of this book sustainability means asking 
questions that relate to the consistency and long-term execution of the proj- 
ect plan. Essential questions that should be addressed include the following: 

• Is the project plan supportable under current operating conditions? 

• Will the estimated cost remain stable within some tolerance bounds? 

• Are human resources skills able to keep up with the ever-changing 
requirements of a complex project? 

• Will the project team persevere toward the project goal, through 
both rough and smooth times? 

• Will interest and enthusiasm for the project be sustained beyond the 
initial euphoria? 

Figure 3.10 illustrates a potential distribution of how organizations 
embrace the tools and techniques of project management. The innovators 
are those who are always on the cutting edge of the applications of proj- 
ect management. They find creative ways to use existing tools and invest in 
creating new and enhanced tools. The early adopters are those who capital- 
ize on using project management whenever an opportunity develops. Early 
champions are those who provide support for and encourage the applica- 
tion of project management. Most managers will fall in this category. Late 
champions are those who say "show me the money" and I will believe. They 
eventually come around to the side of project management once they see and 
experience the benefits directly. The laggards are those who remain obsti- 
nate no matter what. They deprive themselves of the structured benefits of 
project management. This is where organizations should focus more efforts 
to encourage the laggards to move in the direction of embracing and apply- 
ing project management. 




FIGURE 3.10 

Percentage categories of how organizations embrace project management. 



4 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 



Communication is the foundation of project success. 

Communication is vital to everything in a project (Mooz and Howard, 2003). 
Any successful project manager would spend 90% of his or her time on com- 
munication activities. This is a vital function that is even more crucial in the oil 
and gas business because of the multitude of stakeholders. Communications 
management refers to the functional interface between individuals and 
groups within the project environment. This involves proper organization, 
routing, and control of information needed to facilitate work. Good commu- 
nication is in effect when there is a common understanding of information 
between the communicator and the target. Communications management 
facilitates unity of purpose in the project environment. The success of a proj- 
ect is directly related to the effectiveness of project communication. 

The project team should employ all possible avenues to get the project 
information across to everyone. 



Communications Management: Step-by-Step Implementation 

The communications management component of the PMBOK consists of the 
four elements shown below: 

Step 1: Communications planning 
Step 2: Information distribution 
Step 3: Performance reporting 
Step 4: Manage stakeholders 

Table 4.1 shows an implementation of communications management across 
the process groups of project management. Tables 4.2 through 4.5 present the 
inputs, tools, techniques, and outputs of each step of communications man- 
agement. Communications planning involves determining the information 
and communication needs of the stakeholders regarding who needs what 
information, when, where, and how. Information distribution involves mak- 
ing the needed information available to project stakeholders in a timely man- 
ner and in appropriate dosage. Performance reporting involves collecting 

91 



92 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



TABLE 4.1 

Implementation of Communications Management across Process Groups 

Monitoring and 
Initiating Planning Executing Controlling Closing 



Project communications 
management 



1 . Communications 
planning 



2. Information 
distribution 



3. Performance 
reporting 

4. Manage 

stakeholders 



Source: PMI. 2004. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 3rd 
Edition, Project Management Institute, Newtown Square, PA. 

and disseminating performance information, which includes status report- 
ing, progress measurement, and forecasting. Managing stakeholders involves 
managing communications to satisfy the requirements of the stakeholders so 
as to resolve issues that develop. 



Complexity of Multiperson Communication 

Communication complexity increases with an increase in the number of 
communication channels. It is one thing to wish to communicate freely, but it 
is another thing to contend with the increased complexity when more people 
are involved. The statistical formula of combination can be used to estimate 
the complexity of communication as a function of the number of communi- 
cation channels or number of participants. The combination formula is used 



TABLE 4.2 

Tools and Techniques for Communications Planning within Project 
Communications Management 

Step 1: Communications Planning 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Enterprise environmental 

factors 
Organizational process assets 



Project scope statement 

Project constraints and 

assumptions 
Other in-house (custom) factors 

of relevance and interest 



Communications 
requirement analysis 

Communications 
technology 



Communications 

responsibility matrix 
Collaborative alliance 

Other in-house (custom) 
tools and techniques 



Communications 

management plan 
Other in-house outputs, 

reports, and data inferences 

of interest to the 

organization 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 



93 



TABLE 4.3 

Tools and Techniques for Information Distribution within Project Communications 
Management 

Step 2: Information Distribution 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Communications 

management plan 
Personnel distribution list 



Other in-house (custom) 
factors of relevance and 
interest 



Communication modes and 

skills 
Social networking 



Influence networking 



Meetings and dialogues 
Communication relationships 
Information gathering and 

retrieval systems 
Information distribution 

methods 
Lessons learned 
Best practices 
Information Eexchange 
Other in-house (custom) 

tools and techniques 



Organizational process assets 
(updates) 

Other in-house outputs, 
reports, and data inferences 
of interest to the organization 



TABLE 4.4 

Tools and Techniques for Performance Reporting within Project Communications 
Management 



Inputs 



Step 3: Performance Reporting 
Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Work performance 

information 
Performance 

measurements 
Forecasted completion 
Quality control 

measurements 
Project performance 

measurement baseline 
Approved change 

requests 

List of deliverables 

Other in-house (custom) 
factors of relevance and 
interest 



Information presentation 

tools 
Performance information 

gathering and compilation 
Status review meetings 
Time reporting systems 

Cost reporting systems 



Other in-house (custom) 
tools and techniques 



Performance reports 

Forecasts 

Requested changes 
Recommended corrective 

actions 
Organizational process assets 

Other in-house outputs, 
reports, and data inferences 
of interest to the organization 



94 



Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



TABLE 4.5 

Tools and Techniques for Managing Stakeholders within Project Communications 
Management 

Step 4: Manage Stakeholders 



Inputs 



Tools and Techniques 



Output(s) 



Communications 

management plan 
Organizational process assets 
Other in-house (custom) 

factors of relevance and 

interest 



Communications methods Resolved issues 



Issue logs 

Other in-house (custom) 
tools and techniques 



Conflict resolution report 
Approved change requests 



Approved corrective actions 
Organizational process assets 

(updates) 
Other in-house outputs, 
reports, and data inferences 
of interest to the organization 



to calculate the number of possible combinations of r objects from a set of n 
objects. This is written as 



C 



n\ 



r\[n - r]\ 



(4.1) 



In the case of communication, for illustration purposes, we assume that 
communication is between two members of a team at a time. That is, com- 
bination of two from n team members. That is, the number of possible com- 
binations of two members out of a team of n people. Thus, the formula for 
communication complexity reduces to the expression below, after some of 
the computation factors cancel out: 



&lt;S~i 



n(n - 1) 
2 



(4.2) 



In a similar vein, Badiru (2008) introduced a formula for cooperation com- 
plexity based on the statistical concept of permutation. Permutation is the 
number of possible arrangements of k objects taken from a set of n objects. 
The permutation formula is written as 



n\ 



(n-k)\ 



(4.3) 



Thus, for the number of possible permutations of two members out of a 
team of n members is estimated as 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 



95 



Complexity level 



Cooperation complexity 




: n(n-l) 



ri ! «(«-l) 

Communication complexity 



Number of participants 

FIGURE 4.1 

Plots of communication and cooperation complexities. 

n P 2 = n(n-l) 



(4.4) 



The permutation formula is used for cooperation because cooperation is 
bidirectional. Full cooperation requires that if A cooperates with B, then B 
must cooperate with A. But A cooperating with B does not necessarily imply 
B cooperating with A. In notational form, that is 

A — &gt; B does not necessarily imply B — &gt; A. 

Figure 4.1 shows the relative plots of communication complexity and coop- 
eration complexity as function of project team size, n. It is seen that complex- 
ity increases rapidly as the number of communication participants increases. 
Coordination complexity is even more exponential as the number of team 
members increases. Interested readers can derive their own coordination 
complexity formula based on the standard combination and permutation 
formulas or other statistical measures. The complexity formulas indicate a 
need for a more structured approach to implement the techniques of project 
management. The communications templates and guidelines presented in 
this chapter are useful for the general management of STEP projects. Each 
specific project implementation must adapt the guidelines to the prevailing 
scenario and constraints of a project. 



Using the Triple C Model 

The Triple C model of communication, cooperation, and coordination pre- 
sented by Badiru (2008) is a viable tool for ensuring effective communi- 
cation in the project environment. The Triple C model states that project 



96 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



management can be enhanced by implementing it within the following inte- 
grated and hierarchical processes: 

• Communication 

• Cooperation 

• Coordination 

The model facilitates a systematic approach to project planning, organiz- 
ing, scheduling, and control. The Triple C model requires communication to 
be the first and foremost function in the project endeavor. The model explic- 
itly provides an avenue to address questions such as the following: 

When will the project be accomplished? 
Which tools are available for the project? 
What training is needed for the project execution? 
What resources are available for the project? 
Who will participate on the project team? 

Figure 4.2 illustrates the three elements of the Triple C model with respect 
to cost, schedule, and performance improvement goals. 

Figure 4.3 presents a framework for the application of the Triple C model 
within PMBOK. 

Triple C highlights what must be done and when. It can also help to iden- 
tify the resources (personnel, equipment, facilities, etc.) required for each 



Communication 



FIGURE 4.2 

Triple C for planning, scheduling, and control. 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 



97 




FIGURE 4.3 

Implementing Triple C within PMBOK. 

effort in the project. It points out important questions such as 

• Does each project participant know what the objective is? 

• Does each participant know his or her role in achieving the objective? 

• What obstacles may prevent a participant from playing his or her 
role effectively? 

Triple C can mitigate disparity between idea and practice because it explic- 
itly solicits information about the critical aspects of a project. The different 
types of communication, cooperation, and coordination are outlined below. 

Types of communication: 

• Verbal 

• Written 

• Body language 

• Visual tools (e.g., graphical tools) 

• Sensual (use of all five senses: sight, smell, touch, taste, and hearing — 
olfactory, tactile, and auditory) 

• Simplex (unidirectional) 



98 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Half-duplex (bidirectional with time lag) 

• Full-duplex (real-time dialogue) 

• One-on-one 

• One-to-many 

• Many- to -one 

Types of cooperation: 

• Proximity 

• Functional 

• Professional 

• Social 

• Romantic 

• Power influence 

• Authority influence 

• Hierarchical 

• Lateral 

• Cooperation by intimidation 

• Cooperation by enticement 

Types of coordination: 

• Teaming 

• Delegation 

• Supervision 

• Partnership 

• Token-passing 

• Baton hand-off 



Typical Triple C Questions 

Questioning is the best approach to getting information for effective project 
management. Everything should be questioned. By upfront questions, we 
can preempt and avert project problems later on. The typical questions to ask 
under Triple C approach are: 

• What is the purpose of the project? 

• Who is in charge of the project? 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 99 



Why is the project needed? 

Where is the project located? 

When will the project be carried out? 

How will the project contribute to increased opportunities for the 
organization? 

What is the project designed to achieve? 

How will the project affect different groups of people within the 
organization? 

What will be the project approach or methodology? 

What other groups or organizations will be involved (if any)? 

What will happen at the end of the project? 

How will the project be tracked, monitored, evaluated, and reported? 

What resources are required? 

What are the associated costs of the required resources? 

How do the project objectives fit the goal of the organization? 

What respective contribution is expected from each participant? 

What level of cooperation is expected from each group? 

Where is the coordinating point for the project? 



How to Accomplish Triple C Communication 

Communication makes working together possible. The communication 
function of project management involves making all those concerned 
become aware of project requirements and progress. Those who will 
be affected by the project directly or indirectly, as direct participants 
or as beneficiaries, should be informed as appropriate regarding the 
following: 

• Scope of the project 

• Personnel contribution required 

• Expected cost and merits of the project 

• Project organization and implementation plan 

• Potential adverse effects if the project should fail 

• Alternatives, if any, for achieving the project goal 

• Potential direct and indirect benefits of the project 



100 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



The communication channel must be kept open throughout the project life 
cycle. In addition to internal communication, appropriate external sources 
should also be consulted. The project manager must: 

• Exude commitment to the project 

• Utilize the communication responsibility matrix 

• Facilitate multichannel communication interfaces 

• Identify internal and external communication needs 

• Resolve organizational and communication hierarchies 

• Encourage both formal and informal communication links 

When clear communication is maintained between management and 
employees and among peers, many project problems can be averted. Project 
communication may be carried out in one or more of the following formats: 

• One-to-many 

• One-to-one 

• Many- to -one 

• Written and formal 

• Written and informal 

• Oral and formal 

• Oral and informal 

• Nonverbal gestures 

Good communication is affected when what is implied is perceived as 
intended. Effective communications are vital to the success of any project. 
Despite the awareness that proper communications form the blueprint for 
project success, many organizations still fail in their communications func- 
tions. The study of communication is complex. Factors that influence the 
effectiveness of communication within a project organization structure 
include the following: 

1. Personal perception. Each person perceives events on the basis of per- 
sonal psychological, social, cultural, and experimental background. 
As a result, no two people can interpret a given event the same way. 
The nature of events is not always the critical aspect of a problem 
situation. Rather, the problem is often the different perceptions of 
the different people involved. 

2. Psychological profile. The psychological makeup of each person deter- 
mines personal reactions to events or words. Thus, individual needs 
and level of thinking will dictate how a message is interpreted. 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 101 



3. Social environment. Communication problems sometimes arise because 
people have been conditioned by their prevailing social environ- 
ment to interpret certain things in unique ways. Vocabulary idioms, 
organizational status, social stereotypes, and economic situation are 
among the social factors that can thwart effective communication. 

4. Cultural background. Cultural differences are among the most perva- 
sive barriers to project communications, especially in today's multi- 
national organizations. Language and cultural idiosyncrasies often 
determine how communication is approached and interpreted. 

5. Semantic and syntactic factors. Semantic and syntactic barriers to 
communications usually occur in written documents. Semantic 
factors are those that relate to the intrinsic knowledge of the 
subject of communication. Syntactic factors are those that relate 
to the form in which the communication is presented. The prob- 
lems created by these factors become acute in situations where 
response, feedback, or reaction to the communication cannot be 
observed. 

6. Organizational structure. Frequently, the organization structure in 
which a project is conducted has a direct influence on the flow of 
information and, consequently, on the effectiveness of communica- 
tion. Organization hierarchy may determine how different person- 
nel levels perceive a given communication. 

7. Communication media. The method of transmitting a message may 
also affect the value ascribed to the message and consequently, how 
it is interpreted or used. The common barriers to project communi- 
cations are: 

Inattentiveness 

Lack of organization 

Outstanding grudges 

Preconceived notions 

Ambiguous presentation 

Emotions and sentiments 

Lack of communication feedback 

Sloppy and unprofessional presentation 

Lack of confidence in the communicator 

Lack of confidence by the communicator 

Low credibility of the communicator 

Unnecessary technical jargon 

Too many people involved 

Untimely communication 



102 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



• Arrogance or imposition 

• Lack of focus 

Some suggestions on improving the effectiveness of communication are 
presented next. The recommendations may be implemented as appropriate 
for any of the forms of communications listed earlier. The recommendations 
are for both the communicator and the audience. 

1. Never assume that the integrity of the information sent will be pre- 
served as the information passes through several communication 
channels. Information is generally filtered, condensed, or expanded 
by the receivers before relaying it to the next destination. While 
preparing a communication that needs to pass through several 
organization structures, one safeguard is to compose the original 
information in a concise form to minimize the need for recomposi- 
tion of the project structure. 

2. Give the audience a central role in the discussion. A leading role can 
help make a person feel a part of the project effort and responsible 
for the projects' success. One can then have a more constructive view 
of project communication. 

3. Do homework and think through the intended accomplishment of 
the communication. This helps eliminate trivial and inconsequential 
communication efforts. 

4. Carefully plan the organization of the ideas embodied in the com- 
munication. Use indexing or points of reference whenever possible. 
Grouping ideas into related chunks of information can be particu- 
larly effective. Present the short messages first. Short messages help 
create focus, maintain interest, and prepare the mind for the longer 
messages to follow. 

5. Highlight why the communication is of interest and how it is 
intended to be used. Full attention should be given to the content of 
the message with regard to the prevailing project situation. 

6. Elicit the support of those around you by integrating their ideas into 
communication. The more people feel that they have contributed to 
the issue, the more expeditious they are in soliciting the coopera- 
tion of others. The effect of the multiplicative rule can quickly garner 
support for the communication purpose. 

7. Be responsive to the feelings of others. It takes two to communicate. 
Anticipate and appreciate the reactions of members of the audience. 
Recognize their operational circumstances and present your mes- 
sage in a form they can relate to. 

8. Accept constructive criticism. Nobody is infallible. Use criticism as a 
springboard to higher communication performance. 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 103 



9. Exhibit interest in the issue to arouse the interest of your audience. 
Avoid delivering your messages as a matter of a routine organiza- 
tional requirement. 

10. Obtain and furnish feedback promptly. Clarify vague points with 
examples. 

11. Communicate at the appropriate time, at the right place, and to the 
right people. 

12. Reinforce words with positive action. Never promise what cannot be 
delivered. Value your credibility. 

13. Maintain eye contact in oral communication and read the facial 
expressions of your audience to obtain real-time feedback. 

14. Concentrate on listening as much as speaking. Evaluate both the 
implicit and explicit meanings of statements. 

15. Document communication transactions for future references. 

16. Avoid asking questions that can be answered yes or no. Use relevant 
questions to focus the attention of the audience. Use questions that 
make people reflect upon their words, such as, "How do you think 
this will work?" compared to "Do you think this will work?" 

17. Avoid patronizing the audience. Respect their judgment and 
knowledge. 

18. Speak and write in a controlled tempo. Avoid emotionally charged 
voice inflections. 

19. Create an atmosphere for formal and informal exchange of ideas. 

20. Summarize the objectives of the communication and how they will 
be achieved. 



SMART Communication 

The key to getting everyone on board with a project is to ensure that task 
objectives are clear and comply with the principle of SMART as outlined 
below: 

Specific: The task objective must be specific. 

Measurable: The task objective must be measurable. 

Aligned: The task objective must be achievable and aligned with an 
overall project goal. 

Realistic: The task objective must be realistic and relevant to the 
organization. 

Timed: The task objective must have a time basis. 



104 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



If a task has the above intrinsic characteristics, then the function of commu- 
nicating the task will more likely lead to personnel cooperation. A communi- 
cation responsibility matrix shows the linking of sources of communication 
and targets of communication. The cells within the matrix indicate the sub- 
ject of the desired communication. There should be at least one filled cell in 
each row and each column of the matrix. This assures that each individual 
of a department has at least one communication source or a target associated 
with him or her. With a communication responsibility matrix, a clear under- 
standing of what needs to be communicated to whom can be developed. 
Communication in a project environment can take any of several forms. The 
specific needs of a project may dictate the most appropriate mode. Three 
popular computer communication modes are discussed next in the context 
of communicating data and information for project management. 

Simplex communication. This is a unidirectional communication arrange- 
ment in which one project entity initiates communication with another 
entity or individual within the project environment. The entity addressed 
in the communication does not have a mechanism or capability for respond- 
ing to the communication. An extreme example of this is a one-way, top- 
down communication from the top management to the project personnel. 
In this case, the personnel have no communication access or input to the top 
management. A budget-related example is a case where the top management 
allocates budget to a project without requesting and reviewing the actual 
needs of the project. Simplex communication is common in authoritarian 
organizations. 

Half-duplex communication. This is a bidirectional communication arrange- 
ment whereby one project entity can communicate with another entity and 
receive a response within a certain time lag. Both entities can communicate 
with each other but not at the same time. An example of half-duplex com- 
munication is a project organization that permits communication with the 
top management without a direct meeting. Each communicator must wait 
for a response from the target of the communication. Request and allocation 
without a budget meeting is another example of half-duplex data communi- 
cation in project management. 

Full-duplex communication. This involves a communication arrangement that 
permits a dialogue between the communicating entities. Both individuals 
and entities can communicate with each other at the same time or face-to-face. 
As long as there is no clash of words, this appears to be the most receptive 
communication mode. It allows participative project planning in which each 
project personnel has an opportunity to contribute to the planning process. 

Each member of a project team needs to recognize the nature of the pre- 
vailing communication mode in the project. The management must evaluate 
the prevailing communication structure and attempt to modify it if neces- 
sary to enhance the project functions. An evaluation of who is to communi- 
cate with whom about what may help improve the project data/information 
communication process. A communication matrix may include notations 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 105 



about the desired modes of communication between individuals and groups 
in the project environment. 



How to Achieve Cooperation 

The cooperation of team members should never be taken for granted. It must 
be explicitly elicited and facilitated. Good project communication is what is 
needed to facilitate cooperation. Merely voicing consent for a project is not 
enough assurance of full cooperation. Most off-the-cuff expression of coopera- 
tion is just "faking it." A project buy-in or sign-off that does not have a solid 
foundation of communication is groundless. Project participants and benefi- 
ciaries must be convinced of the merits of the project. That is how intrinsic 
and sustainable cooperation can be achieved. Some of the factors that influ- 
ence cooperation in a project environment include personnel requirements, 
resource requirements, budget limitations, past experiences, conflicting priori- 
ties, and lack of uniform organizational support. As the lead author often says: 

Our level of willing involvement and participation on project is shaped by 
past experiences. 

We should, thus, leverage successful cooperation on one project to build 
cooperative groundwork to future project alliances. A structured approach 
to seeking cooperation should clarify the following: 

• Cooperative efforts required 

• Precedents for future projects 

• Implication of lack of cooperation 

• Criticality of cooperation to project success 

• Organizational impact of cooperation 

• Time frame involved in the project 

• Rewards of good cooperation 

Cooperation is a basic virtue of human interaction. More projects fail due 
to a lack of cooperation and commitment than any other project factors. To 
secure and retain the cooperation of the project participants, you must elicit 
a positive first reaction to the project. The most positive aspects of a project 
should be the first items of project communication. For project management, 
there are different types of cooperation that should be understood. 

Functional cooperation. This is cooperation induced by the nature of the func- 
tional relationship between two groups. The two groups may be required to 
perform related functions that can only be accomplished through mutual 
cooperation. 



106 Project Management for the Oil and Gas Industry 



Social cooperation. This is the type of cooperation effected by the social rela- 
tionship between two groups. The prevailing social relationship motivates 
cooperation that may be useful in getting the project work done. 

Legal cooperation. Legal cooperation is the type of cooperation that is 
imposed through some authoritative requirement. In this case, the partici- 
pants may have no choice other than to cooperate. 

Administrative cooperation. This is cooperation brought on by administra- 
tive requirements that make it imperative that two groups work together on 
a common goal. 

Associative cooperation. This type of cooperation may also be referred to as 
collegiality The level of cooperation is determined by the association that 
exists between two groups. 

Proximity cooperation. Cooperation due to the fact that two groups are geo- 
graphically close is referred to as proximity cooperation. Being close makes 
it imperative that the two groups work together. 

Dependency cooperation. This is cooperation caused by the fact that one group 
depends on another group for some important aspect. Such dependency is 
usually of a mutual two-way nature. One group depends on the other for one 
thing while the latter group depends on the former for some other thing. 

Imposed cooperation. In this type of cooperation, external agents must be 
employed to induce cooperation between two groups. This is applicable for cases 
where the two groups have no natural reason to cooperate. This is where the 
approaches presented earlier for seeking cooperation can become very useful. 

Lateral cooperation. Lateral cooperation involves cooperation with peers and 
immediate associates. Lateral cooperation is often easy to achieve because 
existing lateral relationships create an environment that is conducive for 
project cooperation. 

Vertical cooperation. Vertical or hierarchical cooperation refers to coopera- 
tion that is implied by the hierarchical structure of the project. For example, 
subordinates are expected to cooperate with their vertical superiors. 

Whichever type of cooperation is available in a project environment, the 
cooperative forces should be channeled toward achieving project goals. 
Documentation of the prevailing level of cooperation is useful for winning 
further support for a project. Clarification of project priorities will facilitate 
personnel cooperation. Relative priorities of multiple projects should be 
specified so that any prioritized project will hold the same level of priority 
for all groups within the organization. Some guidelines for securing coop- 
eration for most projects are: 

• Establish achievable goals for the project. 

• Clearly outline the individual commitments required. 

• Integrate project priorities with existing priorities. 

• Eliminate the fear of job loss due to industrialization. 

• Anticipate and eliminate potential sources of conflict. 



Oil and Gas Project Communication 107 



• Use an open-door policy to address project grievances. 

• Remove skepticism by documenting the merits of the project. 

Commitment. Cooperation must be supported with commitment. To coop- 
erate is to support the ideas of a project. To commit is to willingly and actively 
participate in project efforts again and again through the thick and thin of 
the project. Provision of resources is one way by which the management can 
express commitment to a project. 



Implementing Coordination 

After the communication and cooperation functions have been success- 
fully initiated, the efforts of the project personnel must be coordinated. 
Coordination facilitates a harmonious organization of project efforts. The 
construction of a responsibility chart can be very helpful at this stage. 
A responsibility chart is a matrix consisting of columns of individual or func- 
tional departments and rows of required actions. Cells with