Construction Assurance ns-tast-gd-076.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ONR GUIDE 

Construction Assurance 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-076 Revision 4 

Date Issued: 

September 2015 

Review Date:             February 2020

Approved by: 

T Allmark 

Superintending Inspector 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 1.1.3.978. (2019/113164) 

 Review date extended to February 2020. 
 A replacement TAG will be produced in due course. 

Revision commentary: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 08/19 
 

 

 
 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 1 

 
Contents 
 
1.0  Purpose and scope 
2.0  Relationship to licence and other relevant legislation 
3.0  Relationship to SAP’s, IAEA safety standards, etc 
4.0  General advice to inspectors 
5.0  Development and Design Phase 
6.0  Construction Phase 
Appendix 1  - Areas of Construction and Expectations 
References 
 

 
1.0   Purpose and scope 

This TAG contains general guidance and advice to ONR Inspectors on 

1.1 
aspects of civil engineering construction assurance.  

1.2  Civil engineering construction assurance encompasses the processes/ 
procedures and cultural aspects necessary to provide the level of confidence that the 
works are constructed in accordance with the design intent and as required by the 
safety case and that the materials used and construction methodologies adopted 
have not undermined the design assumptions made. 

This document is not intended to provide detailed guidance on either the 

1.3 
design or construction process, but is produced to highlight certain salient areas for 
consideration as part of the regulatory process and may be relevant to planned 
interventions throughout the construction process.  

 

1

It should be read in conjunction with other relevant TAG’s including but not 

1.4 
limited to ‘The management for safety ‘ T/AST/0391; Design safety assurance, 
T/AST/0572 ; Structural integrity, Civil Engineering aspects, T/AST/0173 ; 
Procurement of nuclear safety related items or services , T/AST/0774

. 

This guide is neither prescriptive nor all encompassing. The intention is to 

1.5 
highlight typical construction assurance items that a licensee would be expected to 
address during the design and construction phases of a construction project. 
Appendix 1, identifies some typical aspects, which an ONR inspector may wish to 
consider, or seek further specialist opinion on.  

It is to be expected that further assurance may be sought throughout the 

1.6 
commissioning, handover and operational phases of a facility.  However, this TAG 
only considers construction assurance up to ‘practical completion’ by the civil 
engineering contractor of its works. 

1.7  General reference has been made within this guide to issues relating to both 
quality and design assurance during the design and construction phases, however 
further information is contained in the following guides for these subject areas:- 

  T/INS/17, quality assurance;  
  T/INS/19, construction or installation of new plant;  
  T/AST/57, design safety assurance.  

1.8 
The principles described within the above guides are considered ‘relevant 
good practice’ to ensure that within the life cycle of a construction project, what is 
constructed is indeed the physical form of the design intent, and further that both 
have been executed to a suitable standard, thus ensuring the quality of the product 
is right for the categorisation and classification of the structure and/or component 
being considered. 

1.9 
It is important for the assumptions made by the designer, incorporated within 
the justification of the design within a safety case, to be properly carried through the 
construction phase. The final construction of the works is thus as much a part of the 
safety case as the design. 

2.0  Relationship to licence and other relevant legislation 

2.1 
Licence conditions 14; 17; 19; 20; 22 are the principal relevant licence 
conditions requiring the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements.  

Licence condition 14, relating to safety documentation, requires that the 
2.2 
licensee “shall make and implement adequate arrangements for the production and 
assessment of safety cases consisting of documentation to justify safety during the 
design, construction, manufacture, commissioning, operation and decommissioning 
phases of the installation.” 

2.3 
Licence condition 17, relating to management systems, requires the licensee 
to “make and implement adequate quality management arrangements in respect of 
all matters which may affect safety”. 

 

2

Licence condition 19, relating to construction or installation of new plant, 
2.4 
requires that “Where the licensee proposes to construct or install any new plant 
which may affect safety the licensee shall make and implement adequate 
arrangements to control the construction or installation.” 

Licence condition 20, relating to modification to design of plant under 

2.5 
construction, requires that “The licensee shall ensure that no modification to the 
design which may affect safety is made to any plant during the period of construction 
except in accordance with adequate arrangements made and implemented by the 
licensee for that purpose.” 

Licence condition 22, relating to modification or experiment on existing plant,  

2.6 
requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to 
control any modification or experiment carried out on any part of the existing plant or 
processes which may affect safety.” 

2.7  By the very nature of the subject and potential effect on safety there are many 
other possible relevant licence conditions  including LC 26 - control and supervision 
of operations; LC 25 operational records; LC 12 duly authorised and other suitably 
qualified and experienced persons. 

The general duties under the health and safety at work act7, sections S2(1) ; 

2.8 
S3(1); S4(1); S4(2) and S6(1)a , impose statutory duties.  

The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 20078, places duties 

2.9 
on designers to have “adequate regard to the need:–  
“(i) to avoid foreseeable risks to the health and safety of any person at work carrying 
out construction work or cleaning work in or on the structure at any time, or of any 
person who may be affected by the work of such a person at work take due 
recognition of health and safety in the design and implementation process.”  

2.10  Section 8(2)a of the Ionising Radiation Regulations9 also make specific 
reference to engineering controls and design features, to achieve the restriction of 
exposure to ionising radiation. 

3.0   Relationship to SAP’s, IAEA safety standards, etc 

3.1  Reference should be made to the HSE’s safety assessment principles 
(SAPs)11 for nuclear facilities together with other relevant technical assessment 
guides (TAGs) when assessing such design and construction arrangements, 
processes and procedures.  The most relevant safety assessment principles for 
construction related activities are the civil engineering principles ECE.16 –ECE.19.  

3.2  ECE.16: Civil construction materials should be compliant with the design 
methodologies used, and shown to be suitable for the purpose of enabling the 
design to be constructed, operated, inspected and maintained throughout the life of 
the facility. 

3.3  ECE.17: The construction should use appropriate materials, proven 
techniques and approved procedures to minimise the occurrence of defects that 
might affect the required integrity of structures. 

 

3

3.4   ECE.18: Provision should be made for inspection during construction to 
demonstrate that the required standard of workmanship has been achieved, 

3.5  ECE.19: Where construction non conformities are judged to have a 
detrimental effect on integrity or significant defects are detected, remedial measures 
should achieve the original design intent. 

3.6  Other relevant SAP’s are, Leadership and management for safety,  
MS 1-4;Safety classification and standards: ECS 1-3 and Decommissioning: DC 1, 6  

The 2006 SAPs were also benchmarked against the extant IAEA Safety 

3.7 
Standards and their main principles are encompassed within the SAPs11. 

The IAEA Safety Standards GS-R-3 and GS-G-3.1 provide advice on quality 

3.8 
management and assurance aspects applicable to construction activities. 

3.9  Other relevant guidance can be found in NS-R-1, safety for NPP design; NS-
R-3 Site evaluation for nuclear installations , section 6 on quality control; NS-G-3.6 
Geotechnical aspects of site evaluation and foundation for NPP. 

3.10  WENRA reactor safety reference levels18 relating to:- 
A) Safety policy, S1 Issuing and Communication of a Safety policy (S1.1, 1.5); B) 
Operating Organisation, S1 Organisational Structure (S1.2,1.3), S2 Management of 
Safety and Quality (S2.6) , S3 Sufficiency and Competency of Staff (S3.6);   
C) Management System, S5 Process Implementation (S5.5, 5.6, 5.7,5.8), S6 
Measurement, Assessment and Improvement (S6.4,6.5);  
D) Training and Authorisation of NPP staff, S2 Competence and Qualification (S2.1), 
S3 Training Programmes and Facilities (S3.6), S4 Authorisation (S4.3);  
G) Safety classification of structures, systems and components S1 objective (S1.1) , 
S2 Classification Process (S2.2) , S3 Ensuring Reliability (S3.1), S4 Selection of 
materials and qualification of equipment (S4.2);   
H) Operational Limits and Conditions S1 Purpose (S1.1), are all relevant. 

4.0  General advice to inspectors 

4.1 
This section provides general advice on ONR expectations and potential 
areas to target during inspection/assessment. More specific advice on some features 
associated with construction assurance is then given, firstly during the development 
and design phases of the project (Section 5.1) and then during the construction 
phase (Section 5.2). 

4.2  During both the design and the construction phase’s of a project, quality 
assurance and design assurance are inextricably linked to the issues surrounding 
construction assurance.  A number of existing technical assessment guides are 
relevant to these specific subject areas and the Inspector should consider the latest 
available information. 

 

4

4.3 

The following guides are useful initial reference points:- 

T/INS/017 – Quality Assurance 
T/AST/017 – Structural integrity, civil engineering aspects3 
T/AST/039 – Management for safety1 
T/AST/057 – Design safety assurance2 

4.4  Whilst it is recognised that design organisations may not be the licence 
holder, both the design and construction process should be under the control of the 
appropriate licensee acting as an “intelligent customer”. SAP’s11 (paragraph 56). 

4.5  ONR expects that for construction of a nuclear facility the standards employed 
are commensurate with the magnitude and nature of the hazard presented by the 
facility, and are higher than for general industrial design and construction works. 
Suitable safety categorisation and classification by the licensee should set the 
requirements for the extent of control and assurance that the design and 
construction of a facility is subject to. 

4.6  Prior to the submission of the Pre Construction Safety Report (PCSR) by the 
licensee, ONR assessment is more likely to focus on standards and principles being 
employed, the visibility of optioneering to demonstrate ALARP, and the adequacy of 
the design process and associated arrangements.  

4.7  ONR inspectors need to satisfy themselves that the licensee understands the 
importance of construction assurance, that appropriate processes have been put in 
place and that aspects which will provide construction assurance are being given 
appropriate consideration during the development and design phases of the project.  

The inspector should seek assurance that between: the safety case claims; 

4.8 
the civil design substantiation; the specification of the design details and the 
construction competency of the contractors that the licensee chooses to employ, 
there is a consistency of purpose.   

In addition confidence needs to be gained that the licensee’s construction 
4.9 
assurance processes are targeted at achieving an acceptable outcome, so far as 
can be established during the development and design phases of the project.  In 
particular confidence needs to be gained that the civil engineering designer’s 
intentions will be specified in a manner that can be realised by competent SQEP 
contractors.  

4.10  Following submission of the PCSR but prior to permissioning, the licensee’s 
processes should be fully documented. In addition, activities subject to a permission 
by ONR should be fully defined.  ONR focus at this stage will be towards the 
technical details, but the licensees systems and procedures must be seen to be 
capable of delivering the requirements of the design and safety case. 

4.11  Following permissioning and commencement of construction ONR focus is 
more likely to be on management and technical control in order to ensure that the 
completed installation conforms to the specified requirements.  Firstly, to confirm the 
suitability and sufficiency of all that has been documented as the input to an assured 
construction process.  Secondly, to ascertain those organisations responsible for 

 

5

construction activities fully understand the documented construction information.  
Thirdly, to confirm by observation that construction is proceeding in a controlled and 
validated manner, and lastly to gain confidence that the civil engineering structures 
are being constructed as specified without undermining of any of the design 
assumptions. 

4.12  On-site inspections of construction activities should focus on areas of highest 
nuclear safety significance where high standards are required and/or on any novel 
techniques being employed.  

4.13   Appendix 1 outlines some specific aspects of civil engineering where 
inspectors may wish to focus their attention during the construction phase of a 
project.  This is included as an aide memoire for Inspectors but the list is not 
considered in any way to be definitive or exhaustive.  

5.0   Development and Design Phase 

5.1   Quality during the design phase 

5.1.1‘  Quality assurance and quality control are aspects of good management’5, in 
this respect, areas relating to design and subsequent construction need to be 
appropriately managed to achieve the required quality of the product.  

5.1.2   Areas for consideration during the design phase may include, but not be 
limited to: - 

  Organisations and the communications between them  
  Staffing and training , including SQEP evaluation 
  Document control, including preparation, review , approval and change control  
  Design control, including interfaces, verification, validation  and changes  
  Procurement control, including supplier evaluation and selection, control of 

items and services purchased  

Reference should be made to T/INS /017 on Quality Assurance. 

5.2   Design categorisation and classification 

5.2.1   Structures, systems and components (SSC) should be designed and specified 
to provide the required engineering functionality. This functionality will have an 
influence on safety and so requires an appropriate safety category to be assigned.  

5.2.2   ONR expectation is that the processes and procedures considered should be 
to an appropriate level dependent upon the categorisation and classification being 
applied.  

5.2.3   Categorisation and classification will affect:-   

 
 
 
 
 

the design methods used and their extent;  
the standards to be used; 
the material selections made;  
the procurement processes used;  
the methods of fabrication and installation;  

 

6

 

the extent and type of inspections as well as maintenance requirements and 
in- service inspections proposed.  

5.3   Codes and standards 

5.3.1   Whilst BS and Euro EN codes, (including nationally determined annexes) may 
not be specifically written with nuclear facility designs in mind, it is noted that they 
may form the base understanding of the contractor in terms of control of materials, 
workmanship, durability, tolerances, testing and inspection regimes. 

5.3.2   It is customary in the UK nuclear industry for designers to utilise other 
international or USA codes as part of the design process. These may also be 
supplemented or replaced entirely by the licensees own standards. Differences in 
dimensional or other units may emanate from foreign designs and this aspect may 
well require further consideration. 

5.3.3   It is therefore important to recognise that codes may set standards and 
requirements for construction details, workmanship, concrete mix design, 
reinforcement and fixing details, material specifications and in the case of the EN 
codes, options for control of construction which may be unfamiliar to a UK 
construction work force.  

5.3.4   Care needs to be exercised at the detailed design stage that appropriate 
account is taken of these aspects ensuring that the design intent is carried through 
as anticipated during the construction process. Appendix 1 provides some examples 
where the design intent may not be met unless the requirements are clearly 
communicated by the designer to the contractor. 

5.3.5   The contract drawings, schedules and construction specification should 
include all design, workmanship, inspection and testing requirements to be fulfilled 
during the construction process.  However, it would also be expected that the 
designer highlights areas to the contractor that might not represent ‘normal’ practice 
in order to establish the practicality of the proposal and ensure the contractor 
understands the full requirements. 

5.3.6   In addition the licensee should have sufficient capability to understand such 
issues and their bearing on safety and fulfil the role of an intelligent customer. Refer 
to T/AST/04921. 

5.4   Material use 

5.4.1   International codes tend to base design on the materials available within the 
country of origin. These materials may not be the standard / readily accepted / 
readily available norms in the UK, for example reinforcing bar yield strengths.  

5.4.2   Useful information may be obtained from the relevant industry bodies such as 
CARES22 for rebar, BCSA31 for steel construction, IMS32 for masonry. 

5.4.3   The designer needs to specify materials (for instance reinforcement bars) that 
will meet the relevant structural requirements in a manner that is acceptable to the 
contractor.  Failure to communicate and agree with the contractor these 
requirements will lead to formal design change requests later.  Changes in materials 

 

7

subsequent to the completion of the design should be kept to a minimum as 
determining the implications for the design can require multi disciplinary specialist 
knowledge and if there are numerous design changes there is a risk that the 
specialists may not be aware of all the changes when making a decision. 

5.5   Codes and testing requirements 

5.5.1   International / USA codes13,23,24,25  such as American Institute of Steel 
Construction (ANSI/AISC 360) Specification for structural steel buildings23 or 
American Concrete Institute (ACI 349)13 Code requirements for nuclear safety 
related concrete structures, may base the design on differing forms of test results 
and requirements . For example the use of cylinder compressive strengths instead of 
cube compressive strengths (see also Appendix 1).   

5.5.2   ONR expectation is that the principal contractor / contractor should be fully 
conversant with the relevant codes used and further that suitably qualified and 
experienced personnel (SQEP) are employed in the relevant site supervisory roles. 
An Inspection and Test Plan (ITP) should be agreed with the licensee. 

5.6   Alignment of the civil engineering design and safety case  

5.6.1   The PCSR should document how operational and safety functional 
requirements have been derived and communicated to the civil engineering designer 
in a clear manner. 

5.6.2   The designer’s requirements are generally communicated to the contractor 
through the contract drawings, schedules and construction specification.  It is 
expected that these documents would include all design, workmanship, inspection 
and testing requirements to be fulfilled during the construction process. 

5.6.3   It is an ONR expectation that the designer and contractor engage in early 
dialogue regarding the methods to be used, the design intent and possible contractor 
‘optioneering’. This is considered an important stage in the early communication of 
both the design and the assumptions made during the design to fulfil the safety case 
justification. 

6.0   Construction Phase 

6.1   Quality during the construction phase 

6.1.1   The general information on quality assurance and quality control presented in 
section 5.1.1 during the design is also applicable during the construction phase.  
Areas for consideration during the construction phase may include, but not be limited 
to: - 

  Site control, including identification and control of materials, parts and 

components, handling storage and shipping  

  Process control; including planning, procedures, permits, hold points, method 

statements 
Inspection, monitoring  and testing  

 
  Non conformance control  
  Corrective actions, including close out and verification 

 

8

  Records, including as designed and as constructed, maintenance and 

operational manuals 

6.2   Forms of contract 

6.2.1   It is an ONR expectation that criteria should have been set by the licensee for 
selection of the most appropriate form of contract33.  The selection criteria should 
take into account the potential impact of administering and applying the contract on 
the quality of the outputs from the contract where such outputs affect nuclear safety.   

6.2.2   Some factors affecting the quality of outputs may include:   

  Commercial pressures (for example in fixed price lump sum contracts, 

particularly in the delivery of complex safety related designs or components) 
 
Impact of the prescription of an overly-challenging contract programme  
  Suitability of the contract in relation to the maturity of the data that is to be 

used as input to the contract. 

6.3   Supply chain management 

6.3.1   Control and monitoring of contractors may be made more difficult by 
increases in the length of a supply chain. Even with ‘back to back ‘contracts the 
original design philosophy and assumptions can be lost or misunderstood through 
distance from the original intent.  

6.3.2   A further complication may exist in the control / verification of SQEP 
personnel and the overall quality by the licensee of the manufacture and supply of 
safety related components or designs. For example, when significant design is 
included in ‘design and build’ forms of contract the design element of the contract 
may be further subcontracted thus becoming increasingly more remote within a 
supply chain.   

6.3.3   It is an ONR expectation that a similar standard of quality assurance as 
applied by the licensee is evident and verifiable throughout the supply chain for 
nuclear safety related items. It is also expected that supply chain lengths are 
minimised as much as practicable. 

6.3.4   Safety culture and safety awareness is as important as verifiable documentary 
form filling. Contractors would also be expected to exhibit a safety culture and safety 
awareness with a ‘questioning attitude’ similar to that of the licensee. 

6.4   Design assumptions – verification 

6.4.1   During the design certain assumptions may be made. For example, 
assumptions based on ground investigation data obtained. However, site conditions 
in actuality may vary. Examples such as: 

  Varying ground water levels 
  Settlement 
  Anomalies in ground conditions from those expected from ground 

investigations 

  Unforeseen Services 

 

9

It is important therefore that the design team are apprised of site conditions found 
during the construction.   

6.4.2   The use of approved contractor method statements, hold point control plans, 
permits to dig can also be a useful means of reviewing design assumptions. 

6.4.3   It is an ONR expectation that a comprehensive quality management system 
should be implemented that allows the full implications of site issues to be 
considered against the original design assumptions, ensuring the design intent is 
carried through the construction process. 

6.4.4   Of particular importance is a process whereby it is demonstrated that the 
contractor’s methods and materials are capable of delivering the designer’s 
intentions, especially when nuclear safety is dependent on non-standard 
construction methods and materials.  Construction assurance and the necessity to 
demonstrate ALARP means that there should be a culture of continuous 
improvement and to this end it would be expected that construction reviews would be 
undertaken during the construction process. 

6.5   Suitably qualified and experienced people SQEP  

6.5.1   The importance of utilising the ‘right’ people, with the ‘right’ level of 
understanding and knowledge at the ‘right’ time should not be underestimated.  

6.5.2   It is an ONR expectation that suitably qualified and experienced personnel 
(SQEP) in accordance with licence condition LC 12 are used at every level and that 
pre- training prior to contract is considered where appropriate. Reference should also 
be made to ONR guidance T/INS/01217, DAP’s and SQEP’s. 

6.5.3   It is an ONR expectation that all SQEP records should be kept up-to-date 
throughout the duration of a project and at all levels throughout the supply chain.  

6.6   Communication 

6.6.1   Good, clear, timely communication between individuals, teams and 
companies is important. Clear lines of communication and expectations are all part 
of a quality culture. Good communication is vital and it is an ONR expectation that a 
construction project should have systems in place that reflect this requirement. This 
requirement should extend to all parties involved and at all levels including 
communications between the contractor and the designer. Co- located project offices 
should be considered as a means of facilitating communication. 

6.7   Design changes 

6.7.1   It is recognised that changes to the design may arise from various sources 
and for a variety of reasons during the construction process.  It is ONR‘s expectation 
that the licensee, together with the design and construction teams, should operate 
rigorous systems to capture, record, justify and implement any proposed changes, 
however they are initiated. 

 

10

6.7.2   The systems and procedures used should allow a suitably qualified and 
experienced person (SQEP) to decide on the implications of each proposal and 
permit them to be fed back to the relevant members of the design team for 
consideration and agreement to the change, as necessary. 

6.7.3   Construction on a licensed site is subject to LC 20 – modification to design of 
plant under construction, and appropriate safety classification arrangements are 
required. 

6.8   Non conformances 

6.8.1   During the construction process non-conformances may occur. It is important 
that there are appropriate procedures and processes within the project team to 
record non-conformances and confirm the actions taken through the design team to 
address any issues resulting from a non-conformance. 

6.8.2   It is ONR’s expectation that the licensee, designer and contractors should 
have a suitable system for recording and dealing with all non- conformances.  

6.8.3   A site culture should be engendered, such that contractors are positively 
encouraged to report openly any potential non-conformances no matter how they 
have arisen.  Generally, a ‘questioning attitude’ should be fostered within the 
construction team.  

6.9   Certification of materials 

6.9.1   In a modern global market, materials and components may not originate in the 
EU but may be sourced from around the world. Whilst this brings with it certain 
benefits it can also bring challenges ranging from the provision of false certification 
covering dubious quality control in manufacture to a lack of real auditable / 
traceability of components through to counterfeit parts entering the supply chain. 
This lack of an auditable quality trail means that the specification may be 
compromised, threatening any claims made in the safety case. 

6.9.2   It is ONR’s expectation that batch traceability of all materials should be 
available and for high integrity items, component traceability should also be 
available.  The licensee should also consider verification testing by third party of 
certain high safety significance items. 

6.10   Contractor self certification 

6.10.1 “Certification by the work originator of the design and construction of 
structures whose failure would not have high consequences can give adequate 
assurance of structural safety provided there are appropriate systems in place for 
ensuring competence”14.  

6.10.2 However, for safety critical items of plant or nuclear related construction 
processes whose failure would have high consequences, third party independent 
certification should be used to give added assurance of structural / nuclear safety. 
An appropriate level of checks and certification should be found within these two 
extremes. 

 

11

6.10.3 Whilst quality cannot be inspected into the construction process it is an ONR 
expectation that the licensee’s arrangements should include additional supervision 
and management systems to control the construction activity of nuclear related 
construction and reduce risks to nuclear safety.  

6.10.4 It is an ONR expectation therefore that the certification of structural nuclear 
safety related work should thus only be entrusted to appropriately qualified and 
experienced people. 

6.10.5 Reference to licence condition LC 12 concerning duly authorised and other 
suitably qualified and experienced persons should also be made. 

6.11   Third party assurance 

6.11.1 ONR’s expectation is that appropriate quality systems should be applied as 
necessary throughout all levels of a project supply chain in accordance with licence 
condition LC17. Refer also to T/INS/01728. 

6.11.2 Given the potential scale of some projects it is possible that construction 
consortiums may be envisaged. This process may lead to project teams working to a 
conglomerate of systems. Whilst parts may be familiar to certain members of the 
team, other parts are not. This interface needs to be recognised, understood, 
planned and managed such that an effective, efficient quality plan is produced. 

6.12   Contractor selected materials  

6.12.1 It is ONR’s expectation that a suitable contractor proposed material approval 
system should be implemented by the licensee.  Material selection by the 
construction team within the specification should be verified by the original designer 
against the original design intent as translated into the specification and hence 
against any claims on the safety case and validated as such. 

Reference should also be made to the Construction (Design and Management) 
Regulations and associated ACoP29 in relation to designers. 

6.13   Testing, monitoring and inspection 

6.13.1 It is ONR’s expectation that the use of hold points for certain testing and or 
inspections should be considered. Requirements should be clearly stated in the 
specification and should incorporate standards appropriate to the categorisation and 
classification of the structure, system or component. The requirements should be 
incorporated into agreed test and inspection plans, and hold point control plans, 
which have been integrated within the risk management process and programme.  
The use of approved contractor method statements may also act as a hold point and 
control over works on site. Refer also to IAEA NS-G-3.630 ; Section 2, site 
investigation; Section 4, consideration for foundations; Section 7, monitoring of 
geotechnical parameters, for further details relating specifically to site investigation. 

 

12

6.14   As-constructed records 

6.14.1 “As-constructed records have in the past received various levels of attention 
at the end of a project.  Records management and retention is often found to be an 
area for poor practice or sometimes records not available due to the time delays in 
their production”8. 

6.14.2 It is ONR’s expectation that as-constructed records should provide a fully 
referenced account of the work actually constructed and should be produced in a 
timely manner as the information becomes available throughout the contract. 

6.14.3 General progress photographs may be useful during the construction phase 
but will generally be inadequate for more detailed recording of ‘as-constructed’ items.  

6.14.4 However, for the purposes of verification of construction detail, particularly 
areas which cannot be readily inspected, will become inaccessible, concealed or 
covered once complete, it is ONR’s expectation that detailed referenced 
photographs should be retained and used as part of the as-constructed records.  As-
constructed records are an important aspect of future verification and maintenance 
and as such suitable and adequate provision should be made for their retention. 

6.15   Modular design elements 

6.15.1 The use of modular design elements and precast units manufactured off site 
can have benefit in terms of quality, time/ programme but bring with them potential 
problems. There is an increasing tendency to make such elements as large as 
possible. Problems of long periods in storage; haulage; transport across site; 
craneage; and incorporation details should all be considered both in the design and 
within the risk management plan and be part of an agreed and considered 
construction philosophy and methodology.  

6.15.2 It is ONR’s expectation that early dialogue between the designer and 
contractor should occur to discuss elements of the construction process and how this 
can be best achieved. 

6.16   Barriers to understanding 

6.16.1 Barriers to understanding may arise through foreign companies entering the 
UK market. This could include both design houses or design teams working abroad 
and foreign contractors working in the UK. 

6.16.2 “With construction companies carrying fewer of their own operatives, there 
tends to be a heavy reliance on labour only (LO) subcontract organisations. 

Many of these organisations have a diverse workforce. Language barriers are 
common within these workforces, giving challenges in the communication of health 
and safety requirements during site induction and toolbox safety talks”15. 

6.16.3 The use of global workforces may reduce the level of ownership and 
commitment, fragmenting the quality culture ethos that is necessary within the 
workforce. 

 

13

6.16.4 It is ONR expectation that a robust system of checks to understanding should 
be incorporated into both induction and toolbox talks relating to health, safety and 
construction quality issues and that relevant SQEP supervisory staff are employed. 

6.17   Performance indicators 

6.17.1 The selection of inappropriate performance indicators either key performance 
indicators (KPI’s) or safety performance indicators (SPI’s) can produce a negative 
culture.  

6.17.2 It is ONR’s expectation that careful consideration should be given to the 
selection and use of relevant indicators and their effect on the drivers for the project. 
Evidence of monitoring the effects of KPI’s / SPI’s over time should be used.  

6.18   Demolition / decommissioning 

6.18.1 Reference should be made to the Safety Assessment Principles (SAP’s)11, 
Safety principles DC 1-8 together with the relevant guidance. 

6.18.2 CIRIA report T 30.001 Demolition, Dismantling and Decommissioning 
Rev 03 [Jan 09]19 may also be a useful guide on aspects of demolition.  

6.18.3 It is ONR’s expectation that decommissioning and demolition of structures 
should be considered during the planning, design, construction and operational 
stages and in line with licence Condition LC 35 and the CDM regulations8.

 

14

Appendix 1  - Areas of Construction and Expectations  
 

The following table provides areas of civil engineering related to new construction works, which inspectors may wish to use as a prompt for 
further consideration and thought.  This list is not meant to be exhaustive. 

Area for consideration 
Concrete 

Attribute 
Strength 

Additional Notes 
Specifications to set limits 

Additives, including cement 
replacement 

Joints (Construction / Movement) Affect load transfer. Affect 

Shrinkage, construction 
sequence (related Issues) 

Specification to set limits and 
types. Refer to Line to Take 

Specify appropriate detail. 
Specification to reflect design 
code requirements on 
workmanship 
Designer to specify or contractor 
to agree with designer 

Designer to specify or contractor 
to agree with designer 
Specification to set standards 

Concrete 

Surface finish 

Shielding (high density concrete)  Placing and  compaction 

Importance 
Design based on specified 
strength. Excessive over or 
under strength will affect 
performance 
May affect long term strength, 
change performance and affect 
durability 

containment. Affect shielding 

Can affect shear performance. 
Cracks may need to be sealed to 
prevent contamination 
ingress/transfer 

difficulties 
May be important for control of 
contamination/ application of 
decontaminable surfaces. 
Durability, Location of form ties 
Long term records for verification 
of construction standards. Will be 
relevant also for PRS as well as 
initial licensing 
Affects seismic performance. 
pounding 

Seismic Gaps 

 

Seismic gap dimensions should 
be set so that the gap dimension  
is not smaller than the specified 
dimension 

Specification 

15 

Certification 

LC 6 arrangements 

Area for consideration 

Importance 
Affects seismic performance of 
structure 

Additional Notes 
Detailed within the design . 
Reiterated  in the Maintenance 
manuals 

Attribute 
The faces of the seismic gap 
should not have protrusions 
which will reduce its 
effectiveness . There should be 
no debris in the gap and 
horizontal gaps should be 
capped to prevent entry of debris 
in the future 
Where gap filling material is 
specified , no alternative should 
be allowed without agreement of 
the designer 
Complimentary shielding 

Cracks, joints 

Concrete density 

Service penetrations 

Shielding 

Reinforcement 

Placing ,tying 

LC 20 . 
Specification 
Reiterated  in the Maintenance 
manuals 
Carefully considered design 
detailing and early contractor 
involvement in buildability issues 

Specification . Agreement of 
remedial actions with design 
team 
Specification. Workmanship 
supervision, testing 

Carefully considered design 
detailing 

Specification . Code 
requirements 

Affects designed performance of 
the structure 

Can be difficult to support / fix in 
shutter. Can affect reinforcement 
cover/ placement unless detailed 
correctly 
Cracking and joints can 
compromise shielding 

Inadequate compaction concrete 
materials can affect specified 
requirement 
Can compromise shielding. 
Complimentary shielding may 
also be required 
Reinforcement needs to be 
placed and tied in accordance 
with the requirements of the 
code. If the design is in 
accordance with the ACI codes 
then detailing and workmanship 
requirements will be in 
accordance with that code, or 
more onerous code 

 

16 

Area for consideration 

Attribute 
Couplers 

Reinforcement 

Cover 
Laps bends and links 

Earthing 

Storage 

The provision of additional 
reinforcing bars ( or oversized 
bars) 
Use of galvanized or epoxy 
coated rebar 

Importance 
Note specific requirements for 
couplers to meet ACI codes. 
Including fixing and inspection 
Critical to durability 
To meet requirements of design 
codes 
Reinforcing bars may form part 
of a Faraday Cage or other 
earthing system. These 
requirements may be more 
onerous than the normal 
workmanship requirement for 
tying a cage 
Storage of reinforcement should 
be carefully considered. 
Tolerances, bar type and 
reinforcement quality should be 
verified 
Can affect seismic performance 
of structure 

Galvanized rebar prohibited 
within ACI 349  

Additional Notes 
Code specification. Refer to line 
to take. 

Code specification 
Code, Specification 

Specification and relevant Codes 

Quality Assurance and testing of 
materials on site 

Specification- change control. 
Supervision 

Adequate performance of epoxy 
coated rebar and concrete 
should be demonstrated. Refer 
to code. 
Refer ACI committee 201 and 
222. Pavix / Silane not now 
recommended 
Specification and Codes 

LC 28, LC 14 

17 

Corrosion protection 

Effects of chlorides. Deicing 
chemicals  

Welding of reinforcement 

Site investigation / confirmation 
of data, ground preparation, 
insitu testing. Piles / rock anchor 
testing 

Codes and Standards having 
varying requirements 
Cannot inspect therefore highest 
standards of construction, testing 
and record keeping appropriate 

Foundations 

 

Area for consideration 

Fluid retaining structures 

Encast Items 

Attribute 
Contamination 
Unidentified services 

Water bar, joint preparation, 
waterproof membranes 
Inspectablity, repairability,  

Proprietary items. Halfen type 
channels 
Post drilled fixings 

Use of resin anchors 

Material compatibility 

Purpose designed encast 
anchorages 

Reinforcement, compaction, 
voids, staggered laps 

Importance 
Recognition, testing, disposal 
Surveys, site location and 
marking 
Long term durability 
Crack control 
Long term durability of structure. 
Control of contamination 
Dynamic response 

Additional Notes 
Specification, SAP’s 
Permit to dig 

Good detailing, LC28  

LC28 

Refer to line to take  

Dynamic response, failure mode, 
rebar 
Failure mode. Justification 

Selection of materials  
Prevention of negative reactions 

Material properties. Design 
Codes Manufacturing records, 
QA, SQEPs, positioning, welding 
Subsequent construction needs 
to reflect requirements of design 
to support safety case. Process 
of making good to be of 
appropriate standard 
Use of appropriate technology 
for  modelling of service 
interfaces within the design 
stage 
Access, emergency escapes. 
Control of flooding, power and 
emergency supplies 

 

Code requirements on degree of 
clustering . Refer to line to take 
Consider conditions and 
Location . Refer to line to take 
Zinc reaction with alkaline 
materials in concrete. Galvanic 
reactions. Hydrogen generation 
and potential for hydrogen 
enbrittlement. 
Refer to line to take 

Involvement of designer. 
Specification Codes 

Involvement of the designer to 
ensure compliance with safety 
case requirements. 

18 

 

 

Temporary openings 

Interface with Mechanical, 
Electrical and C&I architectural 

Interface impacts on justification 
of the safety case 

Roads , Drainage and 
Infrastructure 

Safety issues, interaction with 
SR service load capacity of live 
service ducts 

Area for consideration 
Construction Cranes 

Attribute 
Stability, ground conditions, 
adjacent plant 

Correct/ Full Design Brief 

Transfer of information 

Importance 
Issues associated with working 
adjacent to SR plant. Crane 
collapse 
Licensee has full understanding 
of facility usage and 
requirements. These need to be 
transferred to a workable ‘brief’ 

Optimisation of design through 
Co-ordinated discipline teams 

Late changes leading to lack of 
clarity and rushed decisions 

Lack of coordination through 
disciplines leads to late 
alterations 
 

Implications of use of certain 
codes & Standards – More 
rigorous & unusual to contractor 
and sub contractors 

 
Contractor works to a normal 
industrial standard  

 
Unacceptable Quality Control 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional Notes 
Crane design, Crane platform , 
Lifting Coordinator, testing 
inspection 
Licensee will work with design 
house. Good communication 
facilitated by co-location of 
design team and licensee’s 
project team. Regular Interfaces 
Optioneering record sheet; 
development of design 
Co-ordinated design discipline 
reviews 

Appropriate modelling for areas 
of tight service interfaces/ 
penetrations 
Design complete prior to 
construction 
Design peer reviews  
Contractor checked for SQEP 
(prior to award, following award 
and throughout contract) – 
Assurance sought that people 
proposed at tender are available 
& subsequently used. Similar 
SQEP issue with sub contractors 
and sub- sub contractors staff 
and QA procedures 
Rigorous Site control with Design 
Input as required 

19 

Area for consideration 
Design specification leaves 
contractor scope to define 
alternative materials (“ or similar 
approved”) 

Attribute 
Contractor specifies unsuitable 
materials as he is not fully aware 
of design requirements 

Importance 
Materials do not fully justify 
safety case 

Additional Notes 
Thorough and complete 
checking by designer of 
contractors proposed materials.  

Design is difficult for the 
contractor to construct 

Contractor finds it time 
consuming or costly to construct 

Non-conformances 

Inevitable 

Contractor either cuts corners or 
proposes changes to design at 
late stage 
Can adversely affect design  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Design Changes 

Time / Availability 

Procurement  Availability 
Contractor Proposals 
Errors/ mistakes- Non 
Conformances 
Oversights from original design 

 

 

Use of material acceptance/ 
proposal forms. Hold point 
approval 
Early involvement of contractor . 
– buildability input incorporated 
into design 
Recording of non conformances 
(No blame Culture) 
Understanding of issue in 
relation to safety case and 
specification 
Closing out of issues including 
up dating of as built records 
Clear limits of authority to accept 
changes & non conformances on 
behalf of licensee by others 
(Design House) 
A robust design change system 
of recording and acceptance 
 

20 

Area for consideration 
Records 

Attribute 
Appropriate records developed 
and maintained 

Importance 
Timely records developed to 
show continuity from design 
through construction in order to 
justify operational safety case 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Contractor methodology 

Contractor methods in some 
circumstances need to be 
validated against design 
assumptions 

Contractors methods may not 
align with original design 
assumptions 

Additional Notes 
Verification of design brief and 
specification are aligned 
(including codes, standards etc) 

Verification of appropriateness of 
codes/ standards to be adopted  
Certification of materials 
Verification of testing for 
proprietary items 
Verification that contractor 
selected materials are compliant 
with design intent 
Timely ’as constructed’ drawings 
including appropriate referencing 
to design changes 
Early engagement of contractor . 
– buildability input incorporated 
into design 

 

21 

References 

T/AST/039 ; Management for Safety 

T/AST/057 ; Design Safety Assurance 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

T/AST/017 ; Structural Integrity, Civil Engineering Aspect  

T/AST/077 ; Procurement of nuclear safety related items or services ,  

5.  Quality Assurance for Safety in Nuclear Power Plants and other Nuclear 

Installations, Codes and Safety Guides Q1-Q14, Safety Series No 50-
C/SG Q, IAEA, Vienna 2001  

Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended)  

Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 (as amended) 

The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 

Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999  

10. 

IAEA guidance DS349, Management System for Nuclear Facilities 

11.  Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2006 rev 1. HSE 

12.  Not Used 

13.  American Concrete Institute (ACI 349/06) Code requirements for Nuclear 

Safety Related Concrete Structures. 

14.  Thirteenth report of SCOSS , The standing committee on Structural Safety 

15.  Construction workers for whom English is not their first language (Reg 13, 15 
of The management of Health and Safety at work Regulations 1999 as 
amended) 

16.  Not Used 

17.  T/INS/012 ; technical inspection guide LC12 DAP’s and SQEP’s 

18.  Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) Reactor 

harmonisation working group, reference levels, Jan 2008. 

19.  CIRIA report T 30.001 Demolition, Dismantling and Decommissioning 

Rev 03 [Jan 09] , Designing to make management of hazards in Demolition, 
Dismantling and Decommissioning easier. 

21.  T/AST/049 , Technical Assessment Guide, Licensee use of Contractors and 

20.  Not used 

Intelligent Customer capability 

22.  UK CARES; url www.ukcares.com 

23.  American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC 360-05) Specification for 

structural steel buildings. 

24.  American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC 341-05) Seismic 

Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings. 

25.  American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC N690-06 Specification 

for Safety Safety related structures for nuclear facilities. 

 

22

26.  Not Used 

27.  Not Used. 

Assurance. 

28.  T/INS/017; Site Inspection and enforcement guidance:LC17 Quality 

29.  Managing health and Safety in Construction – Construction (Design and 

Management ) Regulations 2007 Approved Code of Practice.  

30. 

IAEA, NS-G-3.6; Geotechnical aspects of site evaluation and foundations for 
nuclear power plants. 

31.  British Construction Steelwork Association, BCSA,  www.steelconstruction.org 

32. 

International Masonry Society, IMS,  www.masonry.org.uk 

33. 

IAEA Safety Standard GS-R-3 The Management Systems for Facilities and 
Activities Safety Requirements 

 

 

23

