Decommissioning ns-tast-gd-026.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

appendix 

 

ONR GUIDE 

DECOMMISSIONING 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  

Date Issued: 

September 2019 

Review Date: 

September 2022 

Approved by: 

Nicholas Blackburn 

Nuclear Liabilities Regulation 
Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

CM9 1.1.3.978. (2019/144943 ) 

Revision commentary: 

Major rewrite of Sections 1 to 4 to reflect modern regulatory 
language and developments in decommissioning good practice. 
Restructuring of Section 5 to align with WENRA’s Safety 
Reference Levels. Incorporation of Checklists and Appendices 
into main body of the document 

 

 

 
 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 31 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 
1. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 3 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 3 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 

STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 5 

5.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 7 

6.  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 27 

7.  ABBREVIATIONS .............................................................................................................. 30 

8.  APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 09/19 

 

 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 2 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

1.1 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

2.5 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established its Safety Assessment 
Principles for Nuclear Facilities (SAPs) [1] which apply to the assessment by ONR 
Inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential 
licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders. The outcome of an assessment by 
ONR is to reach an independent and informed judgement on the adequacy of a 
nuclear safety case [2]. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite 
of guidance to further assist ONR’s Inspectors in their technical assessment work in 
support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment 
Guide (TAG) is one such guide [3]. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG provides guidance to ONR Inspectors to advise and inform their regulatory 
judgements in relation to decommissioning at nuclear licensed sites. The TAG 
supplements the guidance in the SAPs [1], in particular principles DC.1 to DC.9 on 
decommissioning. The TAG has been written with due cognisance of relevant 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safety standards for the decommissioning 
of nuclear facilities [4] and the Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association 
(WENRA) Safety Reference Levels (SRL) for decommissioning [5]. 

Duty holders may refer to the TAG as a source of good practice, although the TAG 
should not be interpreted as a set of prescriptive legal requirements. 

The IAEA defines decommissioning as, “the administrative and technical actions taken 
to remove all or some of the regulatory controls from an authorised facility so the 
facility and its site can be reused” [6]. For the purposes of this guidance, delivery of 
decommissioning is assumed to start on cessation of operations and continues until 
the defined end-state has been demonstrably achieved. 

In the UK, decommissioning is carried out under the same legislative framework as the 
preceding steps in the lifecycle. The general legal duties and principles of nuclear 
safety, control of nuclear matter, radiological protection and conventional safety 
continue to apply to decommissioning. Consequently, the general advice provided in 
other TAGs continues to be relevant when a plant enters into decommissioning. This 
TAG focusses on the specific factors that are particularly important to consider in 
decommissioning, with references to the general advice where appropriate. 

Licensees may assign particular terms to stages of decommissioning, such as Post 
Operational Clean Out (POCO), Care and Maintenance (C&M), Surveillance and 
Maintenance (S&M) and Final Site Clearance. As ONR’s objectives in regulating 
decommissioning are outcome-focussed, this TAG is not prescriptive in respect of the 
terminology licensees may use. However, it is important for a licensee to provide clear 
definitions of the terms it applies, to ensure a common understanding of the intended 
approach amongst both its own staff and other stakeholders. 

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

Licence Conditions 

3.1 

All 36 standard Licence Conditions (LCs) [7] apply during decommissioning and are 
relevant to activities involving decommissioning on nuclear licensed sites. However, a 
number of LCs are of particular relevance: 

 
 
 
 

4 
6 
15 
17 

Control of nuclear matter 
Documents, records, authorities and certificates 
Periodic review 
Management systems 

 
 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 3 of 31 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.6 

3.7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
22 
23 
25 
28 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 

Radiological protection 
Modifications 
Operating rules 
Operational records 
Examination, inspection, maintenance and testing 
Accumulation of radioactive waste 
Disposal of radioactive waste 
Leakage and escape of radioactive material and radioactive waste 
Decommissioning 
Organisational capability 

In addition to NIA65, the licensee must continue to comply with all other relevant 
statutory provisions arising under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and 
subordinate legislation, including the Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017, Lifting 
Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998, and Control of Asbestos 
Regulations 2012. Some particularly important legislation in the context of 
decommissioning is highlighted below. 

Nuclear Reactors (Environmental Impact Assessment for Decommissioning) 
Regulations 1999 (EIADR) 

EIADR applies to decommissioning of all nuclear reactors that had a continuous 
thermal load above 1kW whose decommissioning started after the regulations came 
into force on 19th November 1999. 

EIADR can also apply to reactor decommissioning projects that commenced prior to 
19th November 1999, in the event of a change or extension to the project that may 
have a significant adverse environmental impact. In the event of such a change, the 
licensee must apply to ONR for a determination as to whether a new environmental 
impact assessment is required and if so, the regulations apply thereon. 

3.5 

Specific guidance on EIADR is available at www.onr.org.uk/eiadr  

Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 

The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 (IRR17) apply to the use of ionising 
radiation in the workplace, with the intent of restricting exposure and limiting dose to 
the workforce and the public and apply throughout the lifecycle of a nuclear facility. 

Radiological protection has particular importance during decommissioning, due to the 
range of activities undertaken, inherent uncertainties and personnel entries into 
controlled areas when systems that provided protection during the operational phase 
have been retired. Specific regulations of particular relevance to decommissioning 
include, but are not limited to: 

 
 
 

Regulation 8  (radiation risk assessments) 
Regulation 9   (restriction of exposure) 
Regulation 12  (dose limitation) 

3.8 

Further guidance is provided in NS-TAST-GD-038 (Radiological Protection) [3] and the 
Approved Code of Practice [8]. 

Construction Design and Management Regulations 2015 (CDM) 

3.9 

Decommissioning typically gives rise to significant challenges of a conventional safety 
nature, such as working at height, work in confined spaces, work with high 
temperatures, demolition of civil structures and export of large heavy items. 

3.10  The CDM regulations provide the main legislative requirements in respect of the 

management of health, safety and welfare during construction projects. The relevance 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 4 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

of CDM to decommissioning is derived from the CDM definition of ‘construction work’ 
which includes: 

 
 

 

The decommissioning, demolition or dismantling of a structure 
Removal of a structure, or of any product or waste resulting from demolition or 
dismantling of a structure, or from disassembly of prefabricated elements which 
immediately before such disassembly formed such a structure; 
Removal of mechanical, electrical, gas, compressed air, hydraulic, 
telecommunications, computer or similar services which are normally fixed 
within or to a structure 

3.11  Specific guidance on CDM is available at www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l153  

Environmental Legislation 

3.12  Decommissioning results in significant quantities of radioactive wastes, which then 

need to be managed to the point of disposal. 

3.13  The relevant environmental regulator – the Environment Agency (EA) in England, the 

Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) in Scotland, or Natural Resources 
Wales (NRW) in Wales – have responsibility for permitting the disposal of radioactive 
and non-radioactive wastes arising from site activities, and for regulating the site 
against the corresponding permit limits and conditions. 

3.14 

Inspectors on sites undertaking decommissioning should familiarise themselves with 
ONR’s Memoranda of Understanding with the environmental regulators [9] and 
supporting guidance [10], as well as the joint guidance document, “Basic Principles of 
Radioactive Waste Management” [11]. 

4. 

4.1 

RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 
STANDARDS ADDRESSED 

The SAPs [1] provide ONR’s nuclear inspectors with a framework for making 
consistent regulatory judgements on the safety of activities, and include the legal duty 
to reduce risk so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP). The SAPs are split into 
sections relating to different aspects of nuclear safety. One section of the SAPs is 
dedicated to decommissioning and those principles are summarised here: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

DC.1 – this principle relates to consideration of decommissioning during the 
planning, design construction and operation of a new facility, or modification to 
an existing facility to facilitate safe decommissioning. 
DC.2 – this principle relates to preparation and maintenance of a 
decommissioning strategy that is appropriately integrated with other relevant 
strategies. 
DC.3 – this principle relates to timing of decommissioning and justification of 
the continuing safety of the facility for the period prior to its decommissioning, 
with identification of any necessary remedial and operational measures to 
reduce the risk where this cannot be underpinned. 
DC.4 – this principle relates to preparation of a decommissioning plan that sets 
out how the facility will be safely decommissioned. 
DC.5 – this principle relates to facilities being passively safe before entering a 
care and maintenance phase. 
DC.6 – this principle relates to identification, preparation, update, retention and 
ownership of documents and records required for decommissioning purposes. 
DC.7 – this principle relates to arrangements for establishing and maintaining 
the decommissioning organisation to ensure safe and effective 
decommissioning. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 5 of 31 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

DC.8 – this principle relates to periodic review and modification to the 
management system prior to and during decommissioning. 
DC.9 – this principle relates to preparation of the decommissioning safety case 
to demonstrate the safety of the decommissioning plan and its associated 
decommissioning activities, which is to be kept up to date as the work 
progresses. 

4.2 

In addition to principles DC.1-DC.9, the following may also be of relevance to 
decommissioning assessments: 

RW.1 to RW.7 – these principles relate to the management of radioactive 
waste at all stages of the lifecycle of a facility. 
RP.1 to RP.7 – these principles relate to radiation protection and control of 
areas to limit spread of radioactive contamination. 
MS.1 to MS.4 – these principles relate to effective leadership and management 
which is crucial to maintain during decommissioning which is a dynamic state 
leading to progressive reduction in resource on the site. 
EAD.2 – this principle relates to provision of adequate margins to allow for 
ageing and degradation of SSCs. 
EMT.2 – this principle relates to frequency of examination, inspection, 
maintenance and testing of SSCs, which may need re-examination during 
decommissioning. 
ECE.26 – this principle relates to consideration of decommissioning at the 
design stage to ensure incorporation of features to facilitate decommissioning. 
RL.1 to RL.9 – these principles relate to land quality management which will 
likely become more prominent as decommissioning progresses towards final 
site clearance and release from regulatory control. 
FP.1 to FP.8 – these are the fundamental principles which underpin the SAPs 
and outline ONR’s expectations regarding responsibility, leadership and 
management for safety, optimisation of protection measures, safety 
assessment, limitation of risks to individuals and protection of present and 
future generations. 

4.3 

4.4 

4.5 

The SAPs form a complete document and Inspectors should consider them as a 
whole. Inspectors are advised to base their judgements not only on the 
decommissioning principles (DC.1 - DC.9) and the additional SAPs suggested above, 
but to consider the specific case under assessment and which other SAPs and 
associated TAGs may be relevant. 

This TAG therefore provides advice to inform assessments of licensees’ early 
considerations of decommissioning, in addition to the practical delivery of 
decommissioning that takes place after operations have ceased. 

NS-TAST-GD-005 [3] identifies the Western European Nuclear Regulators' Association 
(WENRA) Safety Reference Levels (SRL) as a source of Relevant Good Practice 
(RGP) for operating reactors, facilities in decommissioning and facilities for storage of 
radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel. This TAG has therefore been benchmarked 
against the Decommissioning SRLs [5] and the guidance in Section 5 is structured in 
accordance with the SRL topic areas: 

 
 
 
 

Safety Management System  (SRLs D-01 to D-14) 
Decommissioning Strategy and Planning  (SRLs D-15 to D-29) 
Conduct of Decommissioning  (SRLs D-30 to D-49) 
Safety Verification  (SRLs D-50 to D-62) 

4.6 

The most relevant IAEA [4] documents to decommissioning are: 

 

Fundamental Safety Principles (SF-1) 

 
 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 6 of 31 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Decommissioning of facilities (GSR part 6) 
Safety Assessment for the Decommissioning of Facilities Using Radioactive 
Material (WS-G-5.2) 
Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants, Research Reactors and Other 
Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities (SSG-47) 
Decommissioning of Medical, Industrial and Research Facilities (SSG-49) 
Application of the Concepts of Exclusion, Exemption and Clearance (RS-G-1.7) 

5. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM   

Responsibility during decommissioning (WENRA SRLs D-01 – D-04) 

5.1 

The site licensee retains prime responsibility for safety throughout the lifetime of 
facilities and activities. This responsibility cannot be delegated, as stated in SAP FP.1 
[1]. This fundamental principle applies equally to decommissioning as it does to 
operations, therefore licensees are expected develop their organisation, resource 
levels, capabilities, strategies and administrative arrangements to ensure safety 
throughout the entire lifecycle. 

5.2  When a facility enters decommissioning the licensee may need to broaden its base of 
decommissioning skills, knowledge and capability, which may result in an increase in 
deployment of specialist contractors. Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-049 
(Licensee use of contractors and intelligent customer capability) [3] for general 
guidance and note the relevant requirements of the CDM Regulations, especially the 
responsibilities of the nominated Client and Principal Designer. 

5.3 

5.4 

5.5 

5.6 

At all times, the licensee must ensure that it has sufficient in-house expertise and 
resource to manage and make informed decisions on issues affecting nuclear safety, 
and be able to demonstrate that it is an intelligent customer for any bought-in items or 
services as well as exercising adequate control and supervision of contractors working 
on the licensed site. 

Decommissioning can give rise to new safety challenges, which might require pre-
existing systems to be augmented or reconfigured (e.g. ventilation). Inspectors should 
be mindful that delivery of decommissioning often requires elements of construction 
work and modifications to the existing plant, including the identification and 
management of any asbestos containing materials. Decommissioning arrangements 
therefore need to link with all relevant arrangements made under licence conditions 
other than LC35, for example LC22 (Modification or Experiment on Existing Plant). 

The UK Government expects all nuclear operators should take the steps necessary to 
ensure that adequate funds are in place to meet their decommissioning liabilities. 
Whilst ONR does not directly regulate financial provisions, ONR provides advice to 
other organisations and the government on the adequacy of the plans on which the 
financial provisions are based. Further information is provided in Appendix 1. 

Organisational Structure (WENRA SRLs D-5 – D-8) 

A licensee should retain adequate suitably qualified and experienced personnel 
(SQEP) to ensure nuclear safety throughout the full range of its business. In general 
this is achieved by developing a Nuclear Baseline, against which ONR’s overall 
expectations can be found in NS-TAST-GD-65 (Function and Content of the Nuclear 
Baseline) [3]. 

5.7 

Decommissioning gives rise to cultural challenges with potential to undermine 
workforce morale, such as a high rate of staff turnover, loss of operational knowledge, 
widespread changes in role, a need to develop new skills, loss of employment, 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 7 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

increasing use of contractors and a constantly changing workface environment. It is 
therefore important for licensees to maintain a robust safety culture to underwrite the 
increased reliance on human performance that typically occurs when a plant 
transitions into decommissioning. 

5.8 

Inspectors should also refer to SAPs MS.1 to MS.4 [1] and TAGs NS-TAST-GD-061 
(Staffing levels and task organisation), NS-TAST-GD-048 (Organisational capability) 
and NS-TAST-GD-080 (Challenge Culture, Independent Challenge Capability 
(including an Internal Regulation function) and the Provision of Nuclear Safety Advice) 
[3 for general guidance. 

5.9 

Inspectors may consider whether a licensee’s organisational structure is robust to the 
challenges that typically occur in respect of decommissioning, such as: 

5.10  The licensee’s organisational structure should clearly identify: 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Loss of operational knowledge 
Quantification and retention of sufficient in-house resources, at a time of 
uncertain future employment prospects 
Management of uncertainties 
Pressures to achieve rapid hazard reduction 
Requirements for new skills, to progress decommissioning projects 
A need for greater flexibility as the workface undergoes significant change 
Increased reliance on administrative measures to deliver safety and a reduced 
extent of engineered protection 
Ensuring the licensee’s Nuclear Safety Committee exercises sufficient 
independent challenge of the overall decommissioning strategy in addition to 
scrutinising individual activities 

Responsibilities for ensuring decommissioning is conducted safely 
An intelligent customer capability for decommissioning wherever reliance is 
placed on contractors 
Recognition of the increased prevalence of conventional health and safety risks 
as decommissioning progresses 
Recognition of the importance of maintaining radiological protection standards 
throughout decommissioning 
Priorities for hazard reduction, which should be based on addressing the 
highest hazards and risks in a timely manner 
Project management arrangements, noting the scale and nature of 
decommissioning projects may vary considerably from those in the operational 
phase 
A reporting hierarchy, to allow any conflicts that could compromise safety 
during decommissioning to be resolved  
Adequate integration of all parts of the licensee’s organisation that contribute to 
decommissioning and management of the resulting wastes 

5.11 

Inspectors may consider whether the licensee’s organisational structure is sufficiently 
flexible to ensure safety as the anticipated progressive (and often rapid) change in 
plant status occurs during decommissioning, noting this should allow a precautionary 
approach to any inherent uncertainties. 

5.12 

Inspectors should also seek assurance that the licensee maintains adequate focus on 
the following throughout decommissioning: 

 
 

Its leadership function, to provide adequate direction and oversight. 
An internal challenge function is sustained and appropriate to 
decommissioning. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 8 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

Safety culture, to identify signs of deterioration (e.g. patterns of events or near-
misses) and measures to address this should it be identified. 

Record and Knowledge Keeping (WENRA SRLs D-9 & D-10) 

5.13  Licensees are required to make adequate provision for recording and preserving all the 

data and information that may be required in the future to ensure safe 
decommissioning on nuclear licensed sites for as long as such information may be 
required. 

5.14 

It is particularly important for licensees to recognise the value to decommissioning of 
accurate information on nuclear facilities, their radioactive inventory and the Systems, 
Structures and Components (SSCs) that contribute to safety. Licensees should ensure 
this data is kept up-to-date and maintained in a readily available format, which should 
align with the relevant decommissioning strategy and plan. In considering the scope of 
information to be retained, licensees should be cognisant of the unique objectives of 
decommissioning and how delivery of those objectives may drive different information 
needs to those of the operational phase. 

5.15  LC 6 requires licensees to make adequate records to demonstrate compliance with 

each condition of the site licence, and to ensure that such records are preserved for a 
further 30 years. LC 25 requires licensees to ensure that adequate records are made a 
kept of the operation, inspection and maintenance of nuclear facilities, which will 
include the decommissioning phase of the lifecycle of a facility. 

5.16  The record preservation period of 30 years reflects the requirements of NIA65 with 

respect to third party liability. This period starts from the time when decommissioning 
or decontamination of the plant is complete and all radioactive waste has been 
transferred to another location or disposed of. 

5.17 

Inspectors should seek evidence that licensees have put arrangements in place to 
ensure knowledge of its facilities and inventory are maintained in a secure and 
accessible form, noting the potentially long timescales over which decommissioning 
can take place. 

5.18  For general guidance, Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-027 (Training and 

assuring personnel competence), NS-TAST-GD-79 (Licensee design authority 
capability), NS TAST-GD-061 (Staffing levels and task organisation) and NS-TAST-
GD-033 (Dutyholder management of records) [3. 

5.19  The joint ONR/EA/SEPA/NRW guidance on management of higher activity radioactive 
wastes [12] provides further guidance on managing information and records relating to 
radioactive waste, some of which may be relevant to decommissioning.  

5.20 

Inspectors should confirm that the licensee has recognised the need to capture 
information of relevance to decommissioning, starting from the design stage and 
continuing through the whole life-cycle. The most valuable information to 
decommissioning typically includes: 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Design and construction records describing the as-built situation. 
Material choices and process criteria. 
Operational history (e.g. use of the facility, historic events and incidents, 
radionuclide fingerprint). 
Radiological characterisation data (e.g. radionuclide inventories, dose rates 
and contamination levels). 
Physical condition of the facility, including examination, maintenance, 
inspection and testing records. 
Underground services. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 9 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Reinforcing arrangements. 
Established degradation mechanisms (e.g. corrosion, embrittlement). 
Asbestos surveys to inform an appropriate management strategy. 
Any instances of partial decommissioning or POCO, the end state that was 
achieved and when (e.g. capped off pipework). 
Waste inventory and location. 
Significant plant modifications. 
Location and function of any concealed (eg buried) systems. 

5.21 

In considering the timeframe for record retention the licensee should recognise that 
some records may need to be maintained beyond the completion of decommissioning.  

Implementation of a management system (WENRA SRLs D-11 – D-14) 

5.22  An organisational structure should be in place for the management and implementation 

of decommissioning, with clear responsibilities for ensuring that decommissioning is 
conducted safely. 

5.23  Further guidance on ONR’s expectations for an effective management system is 

provided in NS-INSP-GD-017 (Management Systems) [13], NS-TAST-GD-048 
(Organisational capability) and NS-TAST-GD-065 (Function and Content of the 
Nuclear Baseline) [3]. 

5.24 

In response to events of significance to safety at any point during the lifecycle, 
arrangements should be in place to conduct reviews as soon as practicable, in 
accordance with LC7. Inspectors should be aware that a significant radiological 
release may require amendment to the extant decommissioning strategy or undermine 
the ability of a site to meet the previously assumed end state. 

5.25  The arrangements for controlling any modifications to the decommissioning strategy, 
methodology, programme or procedures should include an assessment of the safety 
implications associated with any such changes. 

DECOMMISSIONING STRATEGY AND PLANNING   

Facilitating decommissioning during design, construction and operational phase 
(WENRA SRLs D-15 & D-16) 

5.26  The requirements for decommissioning should be considered at all phases in the 
overall lifecycle of the facility, starting at the planning and design phase. 

5.27  Although the practical delivery of decommissioning is the last stage of a nuclear 

facility’s lifecycle, planning and preparation for decommissioning should occur with an 
appropriate level of detail from the moment design commences. 

5.28  Targeted consideration of decommissioning during the preceding lifecycle stages can 
significantly reduce the risks and costs of delivering decommissioning. Throughout the 
steps of design, construction, commissioning, maintenance and operation, the 
evaluation of options should consider the potential impacts on future decommissioning 
– licensees should take the opportunity to reduce the challenges and risks of future 
decommissioning wherever it is reasonably practicable to do so. 

5.29  Licensees should take steps to secure a smooth transition out of the operational phase 

into decommissioning, which firstly requires development of a clear and 
comprehensive decommissioning strategy and plan. The safety case should be 
proactively managed, initially to avoid breaches of operating rules and the 
maintenance schedule as plant runs down. Adequate safety margins will need to be 
sustained as the engineered systems that provided protection during the operational 
phase are taken out of service and removed. Decommissioning can also require 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 10 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

development of new capabilities, such as large-scale waste stores, an enhanced 
scope of characterisation and a process of exemption and clearance to address large 
volumes of demolition waste and spoil. 

5.30  Therefore before entering into decommissioning, licensees should carefully consider 

the choreography between; cessation of operations; characterisation of the facility and 
its inventory; removal of the inventory; a precautionary approach to any inherent 
uncertainties; determination of the target end state and any preceding interim states, 
and; deployment of reasonably practicable measures to ensure the safety of workers 
as decommissioning tasks are delivered. 

5.31  National and international experience has shown that many of the challenges and risks 

of decommissioning legacy nuclear facilities could have been significantly reduced or 
avoided, had the initial design and operational philosophy given greater thought to the 
needs of future decommissioning. 

5.32 

In the case of new facilities, Inspectors should check that the licensee’s arrangements 
and processes recognise the need to challenge the design in order to reduce the risks 
of future decommissioning to as low as reasonably practicable (ALARP). Practical 
examples include: 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Selection of materials and surface finishes that minimise activation and the 
ingrowth of radioactivity while aiding decontamination. 
Provision of lay down areas and temporary storage. 
Accommodate the needs of decommissioning into the scope of downstream 
waste management facilities, to avoid bottlenecks, logistical delays and 
unnecessary double handling. 
The design of civil structures should provide for long-term stability over the 
timescales envisaged for decommissioning to be completed. 
Minimise the use of embedded piping and the potential for chronic leaks and 
escapes, for example by routing piping in accessible areas and using double 
containment for pipes that have to traverse concrete walls or floors. 
Construction methods should take cognisance of the fact that the facility will 
ultimately have to be decommissioned, noting that some modern techniques 
are not easily reversible.  
Use of building information modelling (BIM) where appropriate. 
Incorporation of design features to aid the decommissioning sequence, for 
example egress routes for removal of large heavy items and provision of 
cranes with sufficient lifting capacity to deal with the largest expected loads 
from decommissioning. 
Provision of extra space and localised ventilation points around process 
vessels, to simplify the logistics of size reduction and export at the end of life. 
Use of easily removable modular plant, which may benefit both 
decommissioning and preceding maintenance. 
Development of robust asset management arrangements, ideally in accordance 
with the relevant international standard, and of appropriate systems for 
monitoring the condition and health of facilities. 

5.33  Further guidance on ONR’s expectations for the demonstration of ALARP is provided 

in NS-TAST-GD-05 [3]. 

5.34 

Inspectors should ensure the licensee has undertaken adequate site baseline surveys 
to inform the proposed strategy and end-state for decommissioning, including but not 
limited to: the radiological conditions, presence and condition of asbestos bearing 
materials, and condition of civil structures. Baseline surveys should consider both 
surface and subsurface conditions as well as groundwater. For existing sites without 
such survey data, then data from analogous, undisturbed areas with similar 
characteristics should be used. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 11 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Decommissioning strategy (WENRA SRLs D-17 & D-18) 

5.35  Each UK nuclear operator is expected to produce and maintain a decommissioning 

strategy and plan for each site it is responsible for. Such strategies and plans should 
take into account the views of stakeholders (including relevant local authorities and the 
public). The strategy should be to a level of detail commensurate with the type and 
status of the facility, the hazards presented and the stage in the lifecycle. 

5.36  Strategies should consider all ‘relevant factors’, presenting them in a transparent way 
and demonstrating objectively how each has been reflected in the adopted approach. 
Examples of ‘relevant factors’ are listed in UK government policy and include: 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

Ensuring worker and public safety. 
Maintaining site security. 
Minimising the generation of radioactive wastes. 
Effective and safe management of the radioactive wastes that are created. 
Minimising environmental impacts including reusing or recycle materials 
whenever practicable. 
Maintaining adequate site stewardship. 
Using resources effectively, efficiently and economically. 
Providing adequate funding. 
Maintaining access to an adequate skills and knowledge base. 
Conducting research and development (R&D) to develop necessary knowledge 
or capability. 
Consulting appropriate public and stakeholder groups on the options 
considered and the contents of the strategy. 

5.37  The future intended use of the site is a significant factor in determining the scope and 

end state for decommissioning.  

5.38 

5.39 

Inspectors should be aware of relevant government strategies and policies, in 
conjunction with this TAG and other regulatory expectations, when considering the 
adequacy of a licensee’s decommissioning strategy. Although ONR does not enforce 
government policy, inspectors should regulate in accordance with the framework of 
government policy whilst ensuring that national law and regulatory requirements are 
met.  

Inspectors should assess whether the licensee’s decommissioning strategy is 
consistent with relevant national policies and strategies. Management of radioactive 
wastes and nuclear decommissioning are devolved matters, so government policy can 
vary between England, Scotland and Wales. Licensees should identify and justify any 
differences. 

5.40  The licensee is expected to review its strategies periodically, and in response to any 

significant change in circumstances. An up-to-date decommissioning strategy is an 
established regulatory expectation of a robust periodic review of safety (NS-TAST-GD-
050 and SRL D72).  

5.41 

Inspectors should consider whether the licensee’s decommissioning strategies, 
programmes and plans adequately demonstrate a systematic and progressive 
reduction of hazard. This does not mean that hazards must reduce year on year, but 
that in the long term hazards progressively reduce to a level where decommissioning 
can be considered complete in terms of reaching the defined end state for the relevant 
facility or site. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 12 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.42 

Inspectors should consider whether the strategy is sufficiently integrated at facility and 
site levels, if and when appropriate, for example:  

The decommissioning strategy should be linked to, or integrated with, the 
strategy for the management of existing radioactive waste from the site(s) and 
radioactive waste that will be produced during decommissioning.   
Key interactions and interdependences are taken into account within the 
planning process, e.g. any shared reliance on equipment, services and 
infrastructure.  
Where decommissioning is reliant on, or affected by, work at other sites (for 
example treatment, storage or disposal of radioactive waste) then the strategy 
should address these interdependences. 
Fleet considerations may also be appropriate if the Licensee operates multiple 
site licenses. 
Consideration of factors external to the licensee should also be evident, such 
as confirmation that wastes anticipated to be generated meet the relevant meet 
for the intended waste route, or that suitable transport packages have been 
identified. 

5.43 

Inspectors should consider whether the licensee has examined an adequate range of 
options for decommissioning and confirm that these form the basis of the licensees 
decommissioning strategy. The optioneering process should be based on appropriate 
assessment criteria. The assessment criteria should be defined and developed by the 
licensee, but inspectors may want to make a comparison with the list of relevant 
factors in the SAPs under principle DC.3 (timing of decommissioning).  

5.44 

In particular inspectors should also consider whether the following factors are included 
in the option selection criteria: 

How options deliver longer-term risk reduction. 
The dis-benefits of not pursuing any particular option. 
Avoiding the foreclosure of options for later decommissioning stages, 
particularly where there are uncertainties associated with the possible success 
of options. 

5.45 

Inspectors should consider how the option selection process addresses the major 
assumptions and uncertainties relevant to the decommissioning task or project being 
considered. Sensitivity analysis and contingency planning should be considered for 
any areas of significant uncertainty. 

5.46  The licensee’s strategy and plans need to be in evidence, but should be at a level of 

detail commensurate to the current stage in the lifecycle. These should deliver the 
desired outcome of risk-reduction. Hence, prioritisation of activities should be in line 
with achievement of risk reduction. 

5.47  However, prioritisation should take account of other considerations where relevant and 

justified. Examples might include: 

Enabling tasks may be required to facilitate future risk reduction, e.g. in the 
installation of decommissioning infrastructure. 
In some cases dismantling of lower risk systems/facilities may be required or 
beneficial in creating the space and access necessary for other 
decommissioning operations, or to provide training and experience. 
Where age limiting features dictate the early removal of a lower risk system or 
facility in preference to a higher risk one. 
Value and cost-benefit arguments, i.e. efficiency. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 13 of 31 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.48  Licensees may have their own prioritisation process, but inspectors should look to see 

that key prioritisation decisions have been appropriately justified, whichever process 
the licensee has adopted. 

5.49  Decommissioning strategies may take account of the benefits of radioactive decay 

(e.g. cobalt in reactor steelwork) while taking due cognisance of any dis-benefits, such 
as ingrowth of longer-lived or higher dose-rate daughter radionuclides and potential for 
deterioration of containment barriers. They should seek to avoid the creation of 
radioactive wastes in forms that may reduce the number of options for safe and 
effective long-term waste management.  

5.50  The timescales over which decommissioning will take place should be defined in a 

decommissioning programme . Decommissioning programmes should deliver the 
desired outcome of risk-reduction and prioritisation of activities should be in line with 
achievement of this principle. The licensee should explain the timescales for these 
programmes / projects. 

5.51  When assessing such justifications inspectors should take into account the relevant 

factors listed in the SAPs [1] under principle DC.3 which may be influencing the 
licensees proposed strategy. This list of factors is applicable to all types of nuclear 
facilities.  

5.52  When justifying the timing of decommissioning it is good practice for the licensee to 

undertake appropriate stakeholder engagement. 

5.53  Decommissioning tasks typically lead to the generation of radioactive waste in solid, 

liquid or gaseous forms and may result in short-term increases in discharges of some 
radionuclides. In such circumstances, the licensee will need to demonstrate to the 
relevant environmental regulator that the adopted strategy represents an optimal 
approach and reflects the application of Best Available Techniques (BAT), as required 
by the relevant environmental legislation. 

5.54  Decommissioning may proceed as a continuous activity, or as a series of sequential 

stages, the end result of each stage being a significant reduction in hazard. The order, 
timing and extent of each stage will be influenced by the hazard posed by a particular 
facility on a site. Licensees should adequately justify of the order and timescales over 
which it proposes to address each hazard.  

5.55 

In general, Inspectors should expect the licensee to prioritise the removal and/or 
immobilisation of the most active or mobile material to be carried out on the shortest 
practicable timescale, with further actions following with timescales appropriate to the 
remaining hazards they address. In some circumstances, actions may be required that 
temporarily increase risk to enable hazard reduction to take place. In such 
circumstances the licensee should justify its overall approach and ensure that risks are 
reduced ALARP across all stages. 

5.56 

Inspectors should recognise the risks associated with particular decommissioning 
tasks can be increased due to the presence of uncertainty or specific safety 
challenges, e.g. accessibility or confined space working. 

5.57  Adequate arrangements should include the production and maintenance of strategies, 

programmes and plans for the decommissioning of all nuclear facilities for which the 
licensee is responsible, including the future management and disposal of all the 
radioactive waste arising from the site. These should take into account government 
policy and related national strategies, for example on decommissioning or radioactive 
waste management and disposal.  

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 14 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.58  There are inherent uncertainties in decommissioning. Inspectors should look to see 

that a licensee’s arrangements, strategies and safety cases adequately take account 
of these, with appropriate mitigation and contingencies put in place. 

5.59 

Inspectors should give careful consideration to assessing arrangements, strategies, 
programmes and safety cases involving facilities where the risks are intolerable, close 
to becoming intolerable, or may soon become intolerable. In addition to the guidance 
given throughout this TAG, inspectors should particularly consider the following:   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

How the Licensee’s longer-term strategy and plans should deliver the desired 
outcome of large-scale hazard and risk reduction over an appropriate period of 
time. 
How short-term hazard and risks will be managed and longer-term hazard and 
risk reduction achieved.   Regulatory monitoring of enabling milestones is 
required to provide evidence that projects are progressing as agreed, given that 
projects may run over many years to reach the desired outcome. 
The Licensee should have a clearly defined, robust, but not overly bureaucratic 
process for managing risk-reducing projects. This should focus on delivering 
safe and timely remediation of high-risk hazards. 
The principle of defence-in-depth with a suitable number of barriers should be 
applied. Inspectors should acknowledge that some levels of defence-in-depth 
will not be available in certain circumstances, and that mitigation will have to be 
strengthened where protection is missing or rudimentary. 
The worst-case accident scenarios need to be identified to allow adequate 
protection or mitigation and recovery measures to be developed. 
Simultaneous high-risk activities on the same facility or related facilities should 
be avoided so far as is reasonably practicable, i.e. to prevent the occurrence of 
one fault leading to the initiation and progression of another(s).  This should 
include consideration of any foreseeable beyond-design-basis fault 
progression, as illustrated by the Fukushima incident.   
Clear mitigation/contingency measures need to be provided and developed to 
an appropriate level against fault sequences assigned a high probability of 
occurrence.  However, for some legacy facilities it needs to be recognised that 
emergency response/contingency measures will be an essential part of the 
safety demonstration, given the absence of some of the levels of protection that 
would be in place in a modern plant. These should not be the sole safeguard 
against identified fault scenarios, so far as is reasonably practicable. 
Operating and emergency procedures/instructions should recognise and 
address key issues and identified fault sequences related to the implementation 
of a proposed modification to ensure measures are tailored to specific 
circumstances. 

Review of Decommissioning Strategies 

5.60 

In 1995 the UK Government issued a policy statement [14] that introduced a 
responsibility on ONR (the then Nuclear Installations Inspectorate of HSE) to review 
the decommissioning strategy of each UK licensee at least every 5 years, which 
became known as the Quinquennial Review process (QQR). 

5.61 

In recognition of the creation of NDA, the UK Government revised its decommissioning 
policy in 2004 [15] and therein supported continuance of the QQR process, except 
where “equivalent arrangements” are made, e.g. by the NDA. 

5.62  The Energy Act 2004 requires NDA to review its strategy at least every 5 years and to 

undertake statutory consultation with the public and regulators. ONR has therefore 
scrutinised each revision of NDA’s strategy to date and interprets this to be an 
‘equivalent arrangement’ to QQR for the licensed sites owned by NDA. As a 
consequence, individual QQRs are no longer carried out at sites in the NDA estate. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 15 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.63  The operators of sites owned by NDA are required through their contracts with NDA to 
produce and maintain detailed plans to a prescribed format that covers the whole site 
lifecycle, including decommissioning. These plans are reviewed regularly and 
summaries of the extant plans are made available on NDA’s website. 

5.64  A range of other bodies now have interests in decommissioning strategies across 

portfolios of sites outside the NDA estate (e.g. the Nuclear Liabilities Fund in respect of 
EdF; the Nuclear Liabilities Funding Assurance Board in respect of new build, and; 
MoD in respect of its liabilities on the defence sites). Each of these bodies has 
bespoke expectations for licensees within its remit, some of which have a formal basis 
in law (e.g. the requirement of the Energy Act 2008 for an operator of a new nuclear 
power station to have a Funded Decommissioning Programme approved by the 
Secretary of State prior to construction). 

5.65 

In judging whether alternative approaches constitute an ‘equivalent arrangement’ to 
QQR, Inspectors should consider whether ONR has exercised sufficient oversight of 
the decommissioning strategy in question to discharge the responsibility placed upon 
ONR in Government policy without recourse to an additional formalised review. This 
judgement should take account of outcomes from other regulatory interventions, such 
as compliance inspections against the requirements of LC15 and LC35 or 
assessments for the purposes of EIADR. 

Facility decommissioning plan during design, construction and operational 
phases (WENRA SRLs D-19 – D-25) 

5.66 

Initial strategies, programmes and plans should: 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Demonstrate that decommissioning can be feasibly and safely conducted using 
proven techniques or ones being developed. 
Take into account expected hazards and health & safety issues. 
Incorporate design for decommissioning features. 
As far as practicable, the design should take account of features which may 
assist future decommissioning, including contamination and activation control, 
and aim to avoid features which will introduce unnecessary decommissioning 
hazards, e.g. construction techniques which would be difficult to reverse. 
The key decommissioning measures and design features should be described 
and justified by the Licensee.  Such measures may need to be considered on 
balance with construction and operational safety considerations. 
Include waste management and environmental aspects of decommissioning, 
such as management of waste and radioactive effluents. 
Inform the design process and vice versa. ALARP considerations should also 
be apparent (appropriate to the design stage). 
Be used to inform the development of the construction arrangements and the 
operational and maintenance regimes where appropriate.  These should take 
due account of the needs of decommissioning, including features to facilitate 
decommissioning, providing for the early acquisition and maintenance of the 
records most important for decommissioning, and adoption of physical and 
procedural methods to prevent the spread of contamination. Building 
information modelling can be a very useful tool for this purpose. 
Be used to provide a basis to assess the costs of the decommissioning work 
and the means of financing it. 

5.67 

Inspectors should expect to see initial plans developed at the planning phase of a new 
site or facility. These should be commensurate with the scale of the facility, the type of 
the inventory, and the stage in the facility’s development i.e. proportionate and fit for 
purpose. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 16 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.68  Some legacy facilities may not have had strategies in place from this early stage. In 

these cases, inspectors should expect these to be produced based upon sufficient 
characterisation of the site / facility and the challenges which decommissioning will 
need to address, i.e. an appropriate understanding of the start point condition. 

5.69  Generally, inspectors should expect an increase in the level of detail presented in the 
decommissioning strategies and plans as the facility or site nears the end of its 
operational life and approaches the decommissioning phase. 

5.70  Examples of how this may apply in looking at safety cases are: 

 

 

Inspectors should recognise that application of the engineering hierarchy and 
substantiation of safety measures to a level required for modern operating 
plants may not be practicable or desirable for aged facilities due to undergo 
decommissioning.  Therefore, there is likely to be reliance on multi-legged 
arguments and managerial safety measures.  These should be proportionate to 
the hazards.   
The principle of defence–in-depth with a suitable number of barriers should be 
applied (as appropriate to the risks involved). Inspectors should acknowledge 
that some levels of defence-in-depth will not be available in certain 
circumstances and that mitigation will have to be strengthened where 
protection is missing or rudimentary. 

5.71  Optimisation is the term used by the IAEA in its Fundamental Safety Principles: Safety 

Fundamentals [3] where principle 5 states, “Protection must be optimised to provide 
the highest level of safety that can reasonably be achieved.” 

5.72 

5.73 

In order to comply with UK legislation, licensees are required to apply the concept of 
“optimisation” in order to reduce risks to health and safety so far as is reasonably 
practicable (SFAIRP) in addition to utilising Best Available Techniques (BAT) in 
respect of environmental protection. ONR’s guidance on the demonstration ALARP 
(NS-TAST-GD-005) [3] and its supporting references contain ONR’s general 
expectations in respect of a licensee’s demonstration that it has met the requirement to 
reduce risks SFAIRP, which is frequently expressed in terms of reducing risks ALARP. 

In respect of decommissioning, there are some specific aspects of optimisation that 
ONR might expect to be addressed as part of a licensee’s arrangements to comply 
with LC35. The precautionary principle should be applied to the uncertainties that often 
need to be managed during decommissioning. NS-TAST-GD-005 [3] provides detailed 
guidance on this topic. Another important aspect relates to the potentially long 
timescales involved, and hence the increased importance of economic, social and 
environmental factors such as sustainable development and long-term environmental 
damage. 

Final decommissioning plan (WENRA SRLs D-26 – D-28) 

5.74  Strategies, programmes, plans and safety cases should be well developed and in 
place before decommissioning starts. Inspectors should check that there is no gap 
between the operational and decommissioning arrangements and that there is an 
appropriate interface between the two, where this is relevant. 

5.75 

Inspectors should consider whether the decommissioning strategy proposes 
appropriate end state conditions for the facility or site that are consistent with national 
policies and regulatory expectations.   

5.76  One possible end state is where all licensable activity has ceased, the licence is 

revoked or handed back and the period of responsibility under NIA1965 has been 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 17 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ended. This is referred to as de-licensing and inspectors are referred to ONR’s 
separate guidance on this [20].  

5.77  However this is not a mandatory requirement and other end states are possible in 

which some restriction on future use and continued legal responsibilities under nuclear 
legislation continue.  

5.78 

In some cases interim states may be identified. These should be treated as milestones 
within the overall decommissioning plan and are not end states as covered by this 
section of the guidance. The overall strategy/programme should show how 
decommissioning will progress safely beyond such interim states.   

5.79  The precise format of the decommissioning programme is for the Licensee to propose 
and justify, but Inspectors should expect the following aspects to be adequately 
considered: 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

A defined inventory of the plants and liabilities, e.g. radiological inventory, (or a 
predicted inventory for those plants not at the end of their operational life). 
The rationale for selecting the chosen decommissioning option. 
The rationale for the proposed timing of decommissioning.  
Defined end state criteria (and the methodology for subsequently confirming 
that these criteria have been achieved).  
A description of the decommissioning activities (including the content of the 
individual stages), if a staged approach is applied.  
Where appropriate decommissioning should be divided into stages, in which 
case ONR may specify where consent is required to commence a stage or to 
proceed from one stage to the next.   
A Post Operational Clean Out (POCO) strategy. 
Arrangements for asset management during the decommissioning process.  
If the plans include a deferment of decommissioning with an associated care 
and maintenance period, the arrangements should include procedures and 
plans to maintain safety during the care and maintenance period. Such 
arrangements must include plans to manage any risks arising to the health and 
safety of workers, such as those arising from asbestos containing materials. 
Appropriate technical underpinning of the decommissioning methodology, 
including any key assumptions.   
Identification of any relevant Research and Development (R&D) requirements 
or opportunities, e.g. technology developments.  
Identification of the need for facilities to carry out decommissioning and waste 
management, including potential use of supply chain capabilities for treatment. 
A safety case justification, including the identification of safety and radiation 
protection measures/strategies.  The overarching strategy for safety 
management systems should also be evident, and will identify existing facilities 
and equipment that will be used during decommissioning and any necessary 
changes to the existing safety systems, or the need for replacement or new 
plant or equipment to carry out decommissioning operations. 
The management arrangements to ensure safe delivery of the 
decommissioning projects, including arrangements for the management of 
change within the organisation during decommissioning. 

Decommissioning plan update during decommissioning operations (WENRA 
SRL D-29) 

5.80 

Inspectors should assess whether arrangements for decommissioning include 
appropriate review and change control procedures for the decommissioning 
programmes, plans, safety cases and procedures. Reviews should take place at least 
as frequently as the periodic safety review as required under LC15, but an increased 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 18 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

frequency may be necessary to reflect the progressive change in plant status, hazards 
or decommissioning approach as decommissioning progresses. 

5.81  Changes which could warrant a review and subsequent modification of plans and 

programmes may include (but are not limited to): 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

Significant changes to the facility (physical, ageing, inventory, etc), including 
changes resulting from the decommissioning operations. 
Improved plant characterisation data, resulting from plant characterisation 
tasks. 
Significant changes to the decommissioning processes or strategy adopted; 
e.g. those that 

o  Significantly affect the safety of the overall decommissioning programme; 
o  Significantly affect the time in which decommissioning will be completed 
o  Significantly affect the way in which decommissioning will be carried out, e.g. 
the use of new, untried or significantly different methods to those assessed 
previously; 

o  Significantly affect the way in which radioactive waste will be dealt with, e.g. 

different disposal options or new methods of waste treatment; or 

o  Change the proposed end state 

Major deviations from the scheduled programme. 
Major deviations in the assumed status of the facility, e.g. in light of new 
characterisation data.  In particular the identification of new hazards or 
significant changes to the assessed consequences of hazards.  
Relevant operational feedback, or changes in relevant good practice. 
New or revised legislative or regulatory requirements. 
Significant technological developments or opportunities. 
Availability of anticipated external resources such as transport flasks, storage 
facilities or available disposal routes. 

CONDUCT OF DECOMMISSIONING   

Safety classification (WENRA SRL D-30) 

5.82  As decommissioning progresses, there may be a change in the importance of 

designated SSCs to safety. It may therefore be appropriate to declassify or downgrade 
SSCs not required post-operations, or as decommissioning transitions between 
phases, provided this is justified in an update of the safety case. Conversely, some 
SSCs may become more important, or new SSCs may even potentially be required to 
support decommissioning operations. 

5.83 

Inspectors should consider the sufficiency and appropriateness of any remaining SSCs 
to the operations planned during subsequent phases of decommissioning. It is 
desirable for the licensee to minimise its reliance on active safety systems to maintain 
adequate safety margins during any C&M phase(s).  

5.84  Further guidance is contained within NS-TAST-GD-094 (Categorisation of safety 

functions and classification of structures and components) [3]. 

On-site emergency preparedness (WENRA SRLs D-31 – D-34) 

5.85  The licensee’s emergency planning arrangements should be updated to reflect the 

changing hazard as the site transitions from operations through the various stages of 
decommissioning, such that the arrangements remain appropriate to the current state 
of the plant. 

5.86  Amendments to the emergency plan associated with decommissioning typically result 
in a reduced scope of available on site resource, with increasing call for off-site 
responders to support the emergency organisation.  

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 19 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.87  Guidance on licensee’s arrangements for emergency preparedness are covered 
elsewhere under specific guidance, such as NS-INSP-GD-011 (LC11 Emergency 
arrangements) [16] and the new Approved Code of Practice (ACoP) to the Radiation 
(Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2019 [17]. 

Decommissioning experience feedback (WENRA SRLs D-35 – D-37) 

5.88  The licensee’s arrangements should include procedures to identify, screen, analyse, 

and document events, at the facility and from external sources, in a systematic way to 
improve and ensure safe decommissioning. Inspectors should ensure that operational 
feedback is appropriately considered within the decommissioning safety case. 

5.89  This feedback may come from events during decommissioning, or from other facilities 

operated by the licensee. Inspectors should look to see that feedback from events prior 
to decommissioning is included, for example findings of differences between “as built” 
plant and the design drawings, past plant modifications, incidents, spillages etc. 
Learning from post-project reviews should also be considered and incorporated as 
appropriate. Additional feedback can be sourced from other operators and wider 
industry organisations, both national and international.  

5.90  The licensee’s duties under LC7 are unchanged during the decommissioning phase of 

the lifecycle, to notify record and investigate incidents on the site. Where learning 
points are identified following investigation of an event with significance for safety, 
appropriate corrective actions should be implemented to prevent reoccurrence of 
similar events or address other developments adverse to safety. 

Waste management (WENRA SRLs D-38 – D-40) 

5.91  Decommissioning generally results in a broader range of wastes than the preceding 

phases of the lifecycle, in terms of physical characteristics, radiological contents, 
chemo-toxic properties and the volumes arising. The licensee should therefore 
consider the need to strengthen its waste management infrastructure and processes 
prior to undertaking decommissioning, to ensure all the anticipated wastes will be 
managed in accordance with regulatory expectations such as LC32 and the Joint 
Guidance on management of Higher Activity Wastes. 

5.92  The licensee should adopt a precautionary approach to any inherent uncertainties in 

respect of its decommissioning wastes and put in place contingency arrangements 
against potential cliff-edge effects (e.g. a lack of characterisation data may preclude an 
accurate assessment of a waste stream’s categorisation as LLW or ILW). 

5.93  The licensee’s decommissioning strategy and plan should identify the types of waste 
that are expected to be generated and demonstrate that the chosen decontamination 
and dismantling techniques meet regulatory expectations with respect to the waste 
management hierarchy [11]. 

5.94  The hierarchy encourages adoption of options for managing waste in the order of: 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 

Prevent waste from arising in the first place 
Minimise the quantity of waste produced 
Reuse of those wastes that cannot be prevented 
Recycling of waste into a form that allows it to be reclaimed 
Disposal should only occur when waste cannot be prevented, reused or 
recycled and must be implemented in a manner that is compliant with the 
environmental legislation 

5.95  An essential first step in implementation of the hierarchy is for a licensee to 

appropriately characterise and then segregate its wastes, to enable optimised waste 
management through to the point of disposal. The licensee’s system of 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 20 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

characterisation and segregation should enable the wastes arising to be disposed of at 
the lowest practicable categorisation. This should include exemption and clearance of 
those decommissioning wastes that have potential to be disposed of as non-
radioactive material. Further guidance may be found in IAEA Safety Guide RS-G-1.7 
[4]. 

5.96  LC32 imposes the duty upon licensees to minimise the total quantity, and rate of 

production of radioactive waste, so far as is reasonably practicable [3], which is 
particularly pertinent to decommissioning given the potential to generate large 
quantities of waste.  

5.97  The licensee’s radioactive waste management arrangements should therefore be 
updated to reflect the changing nature of the radioactive waste being generated, 
including consideration of appropriate characterisation and segregation to enable 
optimised management and minimise the volumes of radioactive waste requiring 
disposal, so far as is reasonably practicable. This may be captured in an Integrated 
Waste Strategy and/or the Waste Management Plan that is formally required by the 
environmental regulators. 

5.98  The SAPs state that radiological hazards should be reduced systematically and 

progressively, with radioactive waste generated processed into a passive safe state, 
as soon as is reasonably practicable (RW.6), and stored in accordance with good 
engineering practice (RW.5) [1].  

5.99 

Information that might be needed for the current and future safe management of 
radioactive waste should be recorded and preserved (RW.7). This is particularly 
important for any radioactive wastes generated during decommissioning which do not 
yet have an available waste route and will therefore be stored for an extended period 
prior to disposal. The records should capture necessary information to enable the 
continued safe management of that waste whilst in storage, and also support the future 
disposability case, as defined in the waste management and decommissioning plans. 

5.100  NS-TAST-GD-024 [3] and the joint regulatory guidance The Management of Higher 

Activity Radioactive Waste on Nuclear Licensed Sites [12] provide further general 
guidance on management of radioactive waste management. 

On-site and off-site monitoring (WENRA SRL D-41) 

5.101  Licensees normally implement an on- and off-site monitoring programme to 

demonstrate effective management of its operations and protection the public. This 
monitoring should include on plant monitoring for the purposes of demonstrating 
compliance with LC34 (Leakage and escape of radioactive material and radioactive 
waste), as well as environmental monitoring. 

5.102  As a facility transitions into decommissioning, the type of operations conducted on the 
site and the hazards they pose will naturally differ to those during operations. As such 
the licensee should review and modify its monitoring programme to ensure it remains 
appropriate and takes due account of the changes to the facility, any specific hazards 
arising, and the effluents associated with each phase of decommissioning. 

5.103  One key aspect of environmental monitoring relates to land quality management 

(LQM). Whilst this is an area of regulation which requires joint working with colleagues 
at the relevant environmental regulator, it should be recognised by the Inspector that 
ONR has lead responsibility for regulation of radioactively contaminated land on 
nuclear licensed sites.  

5.104  The joint regulatory guidance Regulatory Expectations for Successful Land Quality 
Management at Nuclear Licensed Sites [18] advocates licensees implement LQM 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 21 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

throughout the lifetime of the facility. However, as a site moves into decommissioning 
and implements plans to reach its desired end state, LQM will take on greater 
importance. Further guidance is provided in NS-TAST-GD-083 (Land Quality 
Management) [3]. 

Maintenance, Testing and Inspection (WENRA SRLs D-42 – D-44) 

5.105  Structures, systems and components should be capable of delivering their required 
safety function until the associated hazards have been removed or mitigated. There 
should therefore be adequate consideration of continued maintenance, testing and 
inspection of SSCs during decommissioning until the SSC is no longer required, as 
justified within the safety case. 

5.106  Maintenance schedules should take into account operational limits and conditions as 
required in the decommissioning safety case, and re-evaluated in light of operational 
experience and continuous changes to the plant throughout decommissioning.  

5.107  Adequate asset management is required to ensure the facility remains safe and does 

not degrade to an unacceptable state. Major issues can arise if decommissioning 
programmes are delayed and as such the maintenance, testing and inspection of 
SSCs and important assets, which may not necessarily be claimed within the safety 
case, must therefore address ageing and consider the future decommissioning plan 
timescales, as appropriate. Inspectors should ensure appropriate consideration of 
asset management plans should decommissioning programmes be delayed to ensure 
this does not lead to unacceptable degradation of plant or buildings. 

5.108  Inspectors should consider whether the licensee’s plans adequately address the 

following: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Appropriate baseline characterisation of the assets and the hazards that they 
protect against. 
Programmes for the identification, examination, maintenance, testing, 
surveillance and inspection of SSCs important to safety, which take into 
account operational limits and conditions. 
Consideration of ageing, deterioration mechanisms, and obsolescence of 
SSCs, and the inspection and monitoring of such factors, particularly where 
decommissioning is expected to take place over long timescales. 
Periodic review (e.g. inspections or tests) of SSCs to determine whether they 
are still acceptable. 
Systems to ensure the prompt repair of SSCs, prioritised to take account of the 
relative importance to safety of the defective SSC. 
Systems to ensure the appropriate remedial action following any abnormal 
event which is significant for the safety of decommissioning activities, including 
inspection, testing, maintenance and repair of SSCs, as appropriate. 
Arrangements to review, as necessary, the examination and maintenance and 
testing program, to take account of the rapid changes to the facility during 
decommissioning. 
Similar arrangements to those listed above for any key building structures, 
services or other systems which are not designated as SSCs but do perform 
important functions. 
In taking account of the above factors, plans should adequately address any 
risks to workers arising from access to buildings, facilities, and structures. 

5.109  Further general guidance on expectations relating to maintenance is contained in NS-
TAST-GD-009 (Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing of Items Important 
to Safety) and NS-TAST-GD-098 (Asset Management) [3]. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 22 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Control of decommissioning activities (WENRA SRLs D-45 – D-47) 

5.110  Licensees are required to control activities it undertakes during decommissioning that 
may impact upon safety through use of suitable processes and procedures approved 
by the licensee as part of its management system. Given the dynamic state of a facility 
during decommissioning, the licensee should review and update its processes and 
procedures used during operations, as necessary, to ensure they remain adequate 
and applicable to decommissioning activities. 

5.111  The arrangements should ensure that no decommissioning activity is undertaken 

without a prior assessment of its impact on safety, taking into account the postulated 
initiating events with internal causes included in the safety case for decommissioning. 
Such arrangements should give due consideration to different decommissioning 
activities executed in parallel, which might adversely affect safety of each other. 

5.112  Modifications, to the plant and of planned decommissioning activities, should be 
controlled by the licensee, as per its LC22 arrangements, according to the safety 
significance through application of an adequate categorisation scheme; ensuring 
appropriate focus is retained on those activities which may have a significant impact 
upon safety. The LC22 arrangements should also take into account the cumulative 
effects of changes to procedures, modifications to the facility and the decommissioning 
organisation, technical developments, decommissioning experience accumulated and 
ageing of safety systems and components, to ensure there is no overall degradation in 
safety standards. 

5.113  As facilities are decommissioned and redundant safety systems removed, there may 
be increased reliance on administrative controls over engineered controls. Where this 
is the case, the inspector should consider whether the licensee has adequately 
considered human factors when determining the appropriate controls. The inspector 
may also deem it necessary to seek specific assessment by a Human Factors 
specialist, depending upon the significance of any change. Further guidance is 
available in NS-TAST-GD-058 (Human Factors Integration) and NS-TAST-GD-063 
(Human Reliability Analysis) [3].  

5.114  Additional Human Factors specialist support may be relevant where the licensee 

intends to deploy new equipment during decommissioning, to ensure its design 
appropriately considers the human-machine interface. Further guidance is available in 
NS-TAST-GD-059 (Human Machine Interface) [3]. 

Period of Deferment (WENRA SRLs D-48 – D-49) 

5.115  In the UK, care and maintenance (C&M) refers to a specific period of planned 

quiescence on the site or in the facility between decommissioning phases, usually after 
POCO or de-planting with deferred dismantling and final site clearance. 

5.116  During the C&M period the facility should be maintained in a passively safe 

configuration, so far as it is reasonably practicable, minimising the need for active 
safety systems, monitoring, and human intervention. This approach may necessitate 
removal or downgrading of existing SSCs associated with operations, where 
appropriate, if justified by an update of the safety case. 

5.117  If the licensee proposes a prolonged deferral strategy then the C&M requirements 
should be developed, prior to the deferral commencing. These should be justified 
within a C&M programme that ensures continued safety of the facility, and this 
programme should ensure the ability to decommission the facility safely in the future. 

5.118  When assessing the adequacy of the C&M arrangements inspectors should consider 

whether the licensee has adequately: 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 23 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

minimised, so as far as reasonably practicable, the hazards presented by the 
radiological inventory prior to entering the C&M phase; 
addressed ageing, deterioration and obsolescence for safety systems that will 
be required to remain operational, including potential for upgrade or 
replacement and that this is included within the plan; and 
specified the maintenance and examination regime. 

5.119  The licensee should record clear decisions regarding whether a period of C&M is 

appropriate, taking account of the status of the facility, the decommissioning strategy, 
timescales, etc. Inspectors should expect a robust safety case that takes account of 
long-term safety as opposed to just renewing the short-term safety case underpinning 
such decisions.  

5.120  The Licensee should demonstrate that they can ensure long-term safety by ensuring 

and monitoring a safe plant configuration and maintaining an appropriate organisation, 
supporting infrastructure and corporate memory. The safety case should define a limit 
to the period of proposed deferment. 

5.121  The safety case should justify and demonstrate safety for the proposed period of 
deferral. The Inspector may choose to assess whether the following is adequately 
considered in the safety case: 

 

 

 

 
 

any cliff-edge effects, e.g. those associated with infrastructure availability, 
degradation of the structures or obsolescence of systems; 
the effects of deferral should not impact upon the ability to conduct future 
decommissioning in a safe way where risks are ALARP; 
the whole lifecycle radiation doses associated with C&M and decommissioning 
should be ALARP; 
interdependences of different facilities on a site; and 
knowledge management and retention of necessary skills and expertise.  

5.122  Notwithstanding a justified period of deferral, licensees should adopt decommissioning 

programmes which are sufficiently flexible to facilitate acceleration of the programme, 
should this be necessary for safety reasons. 

SAFETY VERIFICATION   

Contents, review and update of the safety case for decommissioning (WENRA 
SRLs D-50 – D-56) 

5.123  Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-051 (The purpose, scope and content of 

nuclear safety cases) [3] for general guidance on safety cases. The following provides 
additional guidance to inspectors regarding the assessment of safety cases for the 
decommissioning of facilities on nuclear licensed sites. 

5.124  A decommissioning safety case should demonstrate how the licensee will manage 

short-term risks and achieve longer-term risk reduction over the full term of the 
decommissioning programme. The safety case should include assessment of any 
planned new installations, facilities or systems to necessary to support the 
decommissioning programme, and include the final decommissioning of such 
infrastructure itself. 

5.125  Specific radiological hazards that are of particular importance in the case of 

decommissioning include, for example, cutting of activated and contaminated material, 
modification of safety barriers, entry into areas of the plant that were previously 
inaccessible, decontamination of large items, dispersion of contamination during 
demolition. This is not an exhaustive nor exclusive list, and licensees should 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 24 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

demonstrate that its hazard identification process has adequately considered all 
relevant hazards and fault conditions. 

5.126  The safety case should incorporate learning from experience of operating the facility, 
as well as learning from relevant decommissioning projects elsewhere, whether in the 
UK or internationally. 

5.127  During decommissioning, the risks associated with conventional health and safety 

hazards arising from de-planting and demolition activities (eg asbestos, confined 
spaces), will inevitably increase. As such, the safety case should adequately consider 
the appropriate management of conventional health and safety risks where these have 
the potential to impact upon nuclear safety. 

5.128  The safety case should be appropriately underpinned by knowledge of the risk and 
balanced assessment of associated uncertainties, particularly in the case of legacy 
facilities. This should be supported by the examination of records and conducting of 
surveys and measurements to verify the inventory and locations of radioactive, fissile 
or other hazardous materials in the facility, and the surrounding potentially affected 
areas. 

5.129  Where the licensee identifies additional research is required to underpin its 

decommissioning proposals, or to mitigate uncertainties, this should be recognised in 
the safety case, and appropriate plans put in place to deliver the necessary work. 

5.130  Inspectors should consider the licensee’s arrangements to maintain the safety case(s) 

when significant changes occur, according to the safety relevance of such changes 
and licensee’s categorisation. These might include modifications to the facility, plan or 
decommissioning practice at major steps in the decommissioning project, or new 
relevant regulatory requirements.   

5.131  Licensees should periodically review the safety case to confirm the decommissioning 
activities and states are, and will continue to be in accordance with regulatory 
expectations and legal requirements. Such reviews should also identify and evaluate 
the safety significance of any deviations from applicable current safety standards and 
relevant good practice, and ensure an adequate plan to address such deviations are 
implemented.  

5.132  The review should also take into account the cumulative effects of, for example, 

changes to procedures, modifications to the facility or the decommissioning 
organisation, and ageing of safety systems and components. Additionally, the review 
should consider technical developments and decommissioning experience 
accumulated to update the safety case accordingly. 

5.133  In determining the frequency of reviews, the licensee should consider aligning periodic 
reviews with any major changes in the facility or hazard(s) which may arise well before 
an otherwise planned periodic review, notwithstanding the general expectation that the 
interval between periodic safety reviews (PSR) should not exceed 10 years. General 
guidance on PSRs is provided in NS-TAST-GD-050 (Periodic safety reviews) [3]. 

Decommissioning reporting and Licence termination conditions (WENRA SRLs 
D-57 – D-62) 

5.134  The decommissioning plan and associated programme(s) should include sufficient 

short and long term milestones and deliverables to enable progress to be monitored. 
These milestones will usually coincide with major step changes hazard profile of the 
site, as associated with the transition from one stage of decommissioning to the next. 
The licensee should develop suitable metrics to facilitate monitoring and reporting 
against the identified decommissioning milestones. 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 25 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.135  ONR may specify that the licensee may not move from one stage to the next without 
the consent of ONR (LC35). Examples may include transition into a period of care & 
maintenance, or commencement of final dismantling and demolition. 

5.136  The licensee should identify those records to be available after the completion of 

decommissioning, how they will be kept and the necessary retention period. This can 
be done either by the licensee or under quality controlled arrangements for the 
information to be kept by a third party, eg at the Nucleus Archive in Caithness. 

5.137  ONR’s publication Licensing Nuclear Installations [19] explains the circumstances in 
which a nuclear site licence may be revoked by ONR or surrendered by the licensee. 
However a licensee’s “period of responsibility” can only end when: 

 
 
 

a new licence has been granted for the site 
the site is used by the Crown and does not require a licence, or 
ONR has given written notice that in its opinion there has ceased to be any 
danger from ionising radiations from anything on the site. 

5.138  Before issuing such a notice, ONR will assess whether the site has been 

decommissioned to the point where the remaining risks satisfy the “no danger” criterion 
derived from sections 3(12)(b) and 5(15)(a) of NIA65. Consideration of a licensee’s 
case for demonstrating “no danger” should be carried out against ONR’s dedicated 
guidance [20]. Until such time as the licensee can provide an adequate demonstration 
of compliance with the “no danger” criterion, it will retain responsibility for safety on the 
site. 

5.139  As decommissioning progresses towards its final stages and the nuclear hazard is 
progressively reduced, the hazard profile will tend to change towards conventional 
safety and environmental protections issues. The continued application of the nuclear 
licensing regime to these final stages of decommissioning was subject to a 
government consultation on alternative approaches [21].  

5.140  The UK Government is seeking to amend the regulatory framework that applies to the 
final stages of nuclear site decommissioning to by adopting the 2014 Paris Convention 
Decommissioning Exclusion [22]. Under this Exclusion, the nuclear liability regime will 
cease to apply for nuclear sites that meet the qualifying criteria; third party damage or 
injury will then be covered by ordinary law third party liability.  

5.141  ONR will continue to provide effective and proportionate regulation of the delicensing 

of nuclear sites through amendment of the delicensing criteria, should the Exclusion be 
adopted into UK legislation.  

 

 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 26 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

REFERENCES

6. 

 

1  

2  

3  

Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition Revision 0, 
November 2014. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/saps 

Purpose and Scope of Permissioning, NS-PER-GD-014 Revision 6, November 2016. 
Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/operational/assessment/ns-per-gd-
014.pdf  

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 
www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_asst_guides 

 

 

 

 

 

 

on Nuclear Licensed Sites 
Training and assuring personnel competence 

Licensee Core Safety and Intelligent Customer Capabilities 
Periodic Safety Reviews (PSR) 
The Purpose, Scope and Content of Nuclear Safety Cases 

Reasonably Practicable) 
Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing of Items  
Important to Safety 

NS-TAST-GD-005  Guidance on the Demonstration of ALARP (As Low As 
  
NS-TAST-GD-009 
  
NS-TAST-GD-024  Management of Radioactive Materials and Radioactive Waste  
  
NS-TAST-GD-027 
NS-TAST-GD-033  Duty Holder Management of Records 
NS-TAST-GD-038  Radiological Protection 
NS-TAST-GD-048  Organisational Change 
NS-TAST-GD-049 
NS-TAST-GD-050 
NS-TAST-GD-051 
NS-TAST-GD-058  Human Factors Integration 
NS-TAST-GD-059  Human Machine Interface 
NS-TAST-GD-061 
NS-TAST-GD-063  Human Reliability Analysis 
NS-TAST-GD-065 
NS-TAST-GD-079 
NS-TAST-GD-080  Challenge Culture, Independent Challenge Capability (including  
  
  
NS-TAST-GD-083 
NS-TAST-GD-094  Categorisation of Safety Functions and Classification of  
  
NS-TAST-GD-098 

an Internal Regulation function) and the Provision of Nuclear  
Safety Advice 
Land Quality Management 

Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline 
Licensee Design authority Capability 

Structures and Components 
Asset Management 

Staffing Levels and Task Organisation 

 
 

 
 

 

 

4  

IAEA Safety Standards Series, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. 
www.iaea.org/resources/safety-standards  

Fundamental Safety Principles, SF-1. 2006 

Decommissioning of facilities, General Safety Requirements (GSR) Part 6. 2014 

Safety Assessment for the Decommissioning of Facilities Using Radioactive Material, 
Safety Guide WS-G-5.2. 2008 

Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants, Research Reactors and Other Nuclear 
Fuel Cycle Facilities, Specific Safety Guide SSG-47. 2018 

Decommissioning of Medical, Industrial and Research Facilities, Specific Safety Guide 
SSG-49. 2019 

Application of the Concepts of Exclusion, Exemption and Clearance, Safety Guide  
RS-G-1.7. 2004 

5  

Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association. www.wenra.org  

Decommissioning Safety Reference Levels, Working Group on Waste and 
Decommissioning (WGWD), Version 2.1, March 2012. 

6  

 

IAEA Safety Glossary 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

 
 

Page 27 of 31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

10  

Additional Technical Inspection Guides, HOW2, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 

 

7  

8  

9  

11  

12  

13  

14  

15  

16  

17  

18  

19  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Licence Condition Handbook. February 2017. Office for Nuclear Regulation. 
www.onr.org.uk/silicon.pdf  

Work with Ionising Radiation. Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 Approved Code of 
Practice and Guidance. L121 Second Edition, 2018. Health and Safety Executive. 
www.hse.gov.uk/pUbns/priced/l121.pdf   

Agreements with Others, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/agency-
agreements-mou.htm 

Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the 
Environment Agency on matters of mutual interest in England, August 2015 

Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the 
Natural Resources Body for Wales on matters of mutual interest in Wales, December 
2014. 

Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the 
Scottish Environment Protection Agency on matters of mutual interest in Scotland, 
January 2019 

Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR 
and EA on matters of mutual interest in England, ONR-INSP-GD-061 Revision 1, 
March 2018. 

Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR 
and SEPA on matters of mutual interest in Scotland, ONR-INSP-GD-062 Revision 1, 
June 2019. 

Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR 
and NRW on matters of mutual interest in Wales, ONR-INSP-GD-063 Revision 1, 
June 2019. 

Basic principles of radioactive waste management. Joint guidance from ONR, EA, 
SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. Revision 2, 2015. 
www.onr.org.uk/wastemanage/basic-principles.pdf  

The management of higher activity radioactive waste on nuclear licensed sites. Joint 
guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. Revision 2, 2015. 
www.onr.org.uk/wastemanage/waste-management-joint-guidance.pdf  

Nuclear Safety Technical Inspection Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 
www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_insp_guides 

NS-INSP-GD-017 

Licence Condition 17: Management Systems 

Review of Radioactive Waste Management Policy: Final Conclusions. UK Government 
Cm2919, July 1995 

The Decommissioning of the UK Nuclear Industry's Facilities. Amendment to Cm2919. 
UK Government, and Devolved Administrations. September 2004. 

Nuclear Safety Technical Inspection Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 
www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_insp_guides  

Approved Code of Practice and Guidance for The Radiation (Emergency 
Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2019. Office for Nuclear 
Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/documents/2019/reppir-19-acop-and-guidance.pdf   

Regulatory Expectations for Successful Land Quality Management at Nuclear 
Licensed Sites. Joint guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. 
Revision 1, 2014. www.onr.org.uk/documents/2014/land-quality-management.pdf  
Licensing Nuclear Installations, 4th edition, January 2015. Office for Nuclear 
Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/licensing-nuclear-installations.pdf  

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 28 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

20  

21  

22  

 

Delicensing of nuclear sites, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 
www.onr.org.uk/delicensing.htm  

Discussion paper on: Regulation of Nuclear Sites in the Final Stages of 
Decommissioning. Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy. November 
2016.  

Decision and Recommendation of the Steering Committee Concerning the Application 
of the Paris Convention to Nuclear Installations in the Process of Being 
Decommissioned, NEA/SUM(2014)2 , 30 October 2014, Nuclear Energy Agency. 
www.oecd-nea.org/law/decommissioning-exclusion  

 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 29 of 31 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

7. 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ACoP 

Approved Code of Practice 

ALARP 

As low as reasonably practicable 

Best Available Technique 

Baseline Decommissioning Plan 

The Construction Design and Management Regulations 2015 

Care & Maintenance 

Environment Agency 

Nuclear Reactors (Environmental Impact Assessment for Decommissioning) 
Regulations 1999 

Électricité de France 

Funded Decommissioning Plan 

General Safety Requirements (IAEA) 

Health and Safety Executive 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Licence Condition 

Land Quality Management 

Ministry of Defence 

Memorandum of Understanding 

Nuclear Decommissioning Authority 

Nuclear Energy Agency 

Nuclear Liabilities Fund 

Natural Resources Wales 

Operational Experience 

Office for Nuclear Regulation 

Post Operational Clean Out 

Periodic Safety Review 

Quinquennial Review 

Relevant Good Practice 

NLFAB 

Nuclear Liabilities Funding Assurance Board 

Safety Assessment Principle(s) (ONR) 

SFAIRP 

So far as is reasonably practicable 

Scottish Environment Protection Agency 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced Personnel 

Safety Reference Level (WENRA) 

Structure, System and Component 

Technical Assessment Guide(s) (ONR) 

WENRA 

Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association 

 

 
 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 30 of 31 

BAT 

BDP 

CDM 

C&M 

EA 

EIADR 

EDF 

FDP 

GSR 

HSE 

IAEA 

LC 

LQM 

MOD 

MoU 

NDA 

NEA 

NLF 

NRW 

OPEX 

ONR 

POCO 

PSR 

QQR 

RGP 

SAP 

SEPA 

SQEP 

SRL 

SSC 

TAG 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

8. 

APPENDICES 

8.1 

8.2 

8.3 

8.4 

8.5 

8.6 

8.7 

APPENDIX 1 – DECOMMISSIONING FUNDING  

The UK Government expects all nuclear operators should take the steps necessary to 
ensure that adequate funds are in place to meet their decommissioning liabilities. 

In practice ONR does not directly scrutinise the financial provisions made by licensees, 
but provides its view to other organisations who give relevant assurance to the UK 
Government. In such cases, ONR’s advice is based on an assessment of whether the 
decommissioning strategy and plan on which the financial provisions are based aligns 
with UK regulatory expectations. 

Sites owned by the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) are subject to statutory 
financial arrangements made in accordance with the Energy Act 2004, which assure 
the provision of funds by the UK government. In addition to setting out the purposes, 
constitution, staffing and proceedings of the NDA, the Energy Act 2004 identified ONR 
as a statutory consultee on NDA’s Strategy. 

The UK Government established the Nuclear Liabilities Fund (NLF) in 1996 with the 
key purpose of funding the costs of decommissioning the eight nuclear power stations 
(7 AGR and 1 PWR) currently operated in the UK by EdF Energy (EdF). The UK 
Government also agreed to fund decommissioning of the eight power stations to the 
extent that the liability might exceed the assets of the NLF. In order to draw down on 
the NLF, EdF must apply to NDA with a demonstration that the intended spend is 
against a qualifying liability. EdF is also required to submit to NDA a baseline 
decommissioning plan (BDP), on which NDA seeks ONR’s views. 

The UK Government further legislated, in the Energy Act 2008, to ensure operators of 
any proposed new nuclear power stations built in the UK will have secure finance in 
place to meet the full costs of future decommissioning. Under the Act, any such 
operator is required to have a Funded Decommissioning Programme (FDP) approved 
by the Secretary of State in place before construction of its power station begins, and 
to comply with the FDP thereafter. To ensure the operator makes prudent financial 
provisions, the FDP is expected to: 

 

 

Identify all the steps necessary to decommission the power station and manage 
and dispose of all associated wastes, including spent nuclear fuel 
Give due recognition to the government’s ‘Base Case’ of key strategic 
assumptions  

Financial aspects of FDPs are scrutinised by the dedicated Nuclear Liabilities Funding 
Assurance Board (NLFAB) and ONR is recognised as a statutory consultee. Therefore 
ONR would expect to provide advice to the Government on the technical content of an 
FDP in respect of its alignment with UK regulatory expectations. 

The government published detailed guidance on the principles that the Secretary of 
State will expect to see satisfied in a duty holders’ FDP prior to granting an approval: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme
nt_data/file/70214/guidance-funded-decommissioning-programme-consult.pdf 

NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5  
Ref: 2019/144943  

Page 31 of 31 

 
 

