Design Safety Assurance ns-tast-gd-057.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ONR Guide 

Design Safety Assurance 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-057 Revision 5 

Date Issued: 

November 2017 

Review Date: 

November 2020 

Approved by: 

Gavin Smith 

Mechanical Engineering Professional 
Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 1.1.3.776. (2017/456576) 

Revision commentary: 

Minor update to reference the Ionising Radiation Regulations 
2017. Updated November 2018. 

 

 
1. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE CONDITIONS .................................................................... 3 

4.  LEGISLATION AND REGULATORY INTEREST ................................................................ 3 

5.  BMS GUIDANCE ................................................................................................................. 4 

6.  ADVICE TO ASSESSORS .................................................................................................. 4 

7.  SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................ 16 

8.  BIBLIOGRAPHY AND FURTHER READING .................................................................... 16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 11/17 
 
 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 2 

Page 1 of 16 

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the 
assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may 
be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders.  The 
principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist 
ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory 
judgements and decisions.  This technical assessment guide is one of these guides. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) discusses ONR’s approach to the 
assessment of design arrangements and processes for nuclear facilities, and how 
safety is integrated into the design production process.  In particular, the design 
arrangements should demonstrate how integration with procurement, site 
construction/installation and final commissioning is achieved, leading into operations 
and associated maintenance and inspection, as well as the safety case development 
process.  This TAG does not specifically address a single Licence Condition or group 
of Safety Assessment Principles, but concerns an area of activity which is of regulatory 
interest. 

It should be noted that the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) makes specific 
reference to design as an activity which may be subject to licence conditions. 

Licence Condition 14 requires that the licensee “shall make and implement adequate 
arrangements for the production and assessment of safety cases consisting of 
documentation to justify safety during the design, construction, manufacture, 
commissioning, operation and decommissioning phases of the installation.” 

Licence Condition 19 requires that “Where the licensee proposes to construct or install 
any new plant which may affect safety the licensee shall make and implement 
adequate arrangements to control the construction or installation.” 

Licence Condition 20 requires that “The licensee shall ensure that no modification to 
the design which may affect safety is made to any plant during the period of 
construction except in accordance with adequate arrangements made and 
implemented by the licensee for that purpose.” 

Licence Condition 21 requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate 
arrangements for the commissioning of any plant or process which may affect safety.” 

Licence Condition 22 requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate 
arrangements to control any modification or experiment carried out on any part of the 
existing plant or processes which may affect safety.” 

This TAG contains general guidance to advise and inform ONR Inspectors in the 
exercise of their professional regulatory judgement.  This document is not intended to 
provide detailed guidance on the design process for nuclear facilities, but is produced 
to highlight certain key areas for consideration as part of an assessment process. 

It is therefore essential that comprehensive reference is made to the ONRs Safety 
Assessment Principles (SAPs) for Nuclear Facilities and other TAGs when assessing 
such design arrangements and processes.  References to the ONR SAPs and the 
WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels are included in the text of this document. 

1.1 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

2.5 

2.6 

2.7 

2.8 

2.9 

2.10  Comments on this guide, and suggestions for future revisions, should be recorded on 

the appropriate registry file.  

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 2 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 
3. 

 
3.1 

 

 
4. 
 
4.1 

 

 
4.2 

RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE CONDITIONS 

The following licence conditions have relevance in terms of design safety assurance: 

  LC6 Documents, Records, Authorities and Certificates  
  LC12 Duly Authorised and other Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons  
  LC14 Safety Documentation  
  LC15 Periodic Review  
  LC17 Quality Assurance  
  LC19 Construction or Installation of New Plant  
  LC20 Modification to Design of Plant Under Construction  
  LC21 Commissioning  
  LC22 Modification or Experiment on Existing Plant  
  LC23 Operating Rules  
  LC24 Operating Instructions  
  LC25 Operational Records  
  LC27 Safety Mechanisms, Devices and Circuits  
  LC28 Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing  
  LC29 Duty to carry out Tests, Inspections and Examinations  
  LC34 Leakage and Escape of Radioactive Material and Radioactive Waste  
  LC35 Decommissioning  
  LC36 Control of Organisational Change  

LEGISLATION AND REGULATORY INTEREST 

The general duties under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 (HSWA) impose 
statutory requirements as follows: 

2 (1)  It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably 
practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all his employees. 
 
3 (1)  It shall be the duty of every employer to conduct his undertaking in such a way 
as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that persons not in his employment 
who may be affected thereby are not thereby exposed to risks to their health or safety. 
 
6 (1)  It shall be the duty of any person who designs, manufactures, imports or supplies 
any article for use at work or any article of fairground equipment – 
 
(a)  to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed and 
constructed that it will be safe and without risks to health at all times when it is being 
set, used, cleaned or maintained by a person at work; 
 
In addition, the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2015 place duties 
on designers to take due recognition of health and safety in the design process.  The 
Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 also make specific reference to engineering 
controls and design features as the primary means of restricting exposure to ionising 
radiation.  Other regulations under the HSWA also impose duties on designers for 
specified engineering features. Environmental Legislation, Security Legislation and 
International Treaties also impose legal duties on designers. 

It should be recognised that design organisations may not be licensees themselves, 
but should be under the control of the appropriate licensee; therefore acting as 
Responsible Designers to the licensee Design Authority, who also acts as an 
Intelligent Customer (see NS-TAST-GD-079 Licensee Design Authority Capability).  

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 3 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Nevertheless, the statutory legislation noted above, plus the licence conditions 
themselves, provide the ONR with the necessary vires to regulate design activity, 
through coordination with the licensee. 

This regulatory interest equally applies to the early stages of the design process, at the 
optioneering stages.  However, a clear balance needs to be struck between the 
benefits of leverage which can be achieved by early guidance/intervention, and the 
potential negative, disruptive effects which can occur due to detailed questioning of 
early concepts.  Furthermore, caution is necessary to ensure that an impression that a 
design has been approved is not given. 

In particular, the ONR should focus on standards and principles, the visibility of 
optioneering to demonstrate ALARP plus the adequacy of the design process and 
associated arrangements.  

BMS GUIDANCE 

The assessor needs to be aware of ONR’s expectations more generally for Licensees’ 
safety cases and how they are produced, which are set out elsewhere within other 
BMS Guidance documentation. 

A number of other Technical Assessment Guides will be relevant to the subject of 
Design Safety Assurance and the assessor should review the latest available 
information on the BMS. 

In particular, NS-TAST-GD-079 addresses ONR’s expectations for existing and 
prospective licensees’ Design Authority capability. It considers the licensee’s approach 
to: 

  Identification and implementation of organisational arrangements and core 
competencies to understand and manage the design of its plant and the safety 
functions that need to be provided;  
 
  The use of contractors as ‘Responsible Designers’ to provide authoritative advice to 
the Design Authority; 
 
  The retention of design knowledge in a form that is practically and easily available to 
the licensee over the full lifetime of the plant until the plant is decommissioned. 

In particular, NS-TAST-GD-077 informs regulatory assessment of supply chain 
arrangements which are particularly important to the supply of items or services 
significant to nuclear safety designated for use in the UK. It also provides guidance for 
regulatory inspection during the manufacturing stages. 

ADVICE TO ASSESSORS 

Introduction 

4.3 

4.4 

5. 
 
5.1 

 
5.2 

 

 
5.3 

 
6. 
 

6.1 

This guide is concerned with the assessment of arrangements for the production of 
design for structures, systems and components for nuclear facilities.  These 
arrangements should demonstrate that safety considerations are integral to the design 
process, and that the formal safety justification as evidenced by the relevant safety 
case, is fully coordinated with the design activity and should evolve in parallel.  

6.2 

The purpose of ONR assessment of design safety assurance is to establish whether 
the design arrangements, including interfaces with procurement and 
construction/installation, leading into the operations and associated maintenance and 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 4 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

6.3 

6.4 

6.5 
 

 

 

 

 

inspection, are adequate to fulfil the required safety functions, and to establish that the 
hazards created by such arrangements are both tolerable and ALARP, in compliance 
with legal requirements. 

Engineering background 

All structures, systems and components are specified and designed to provide a 
required engineering functionality.  This functionality will have an influence on safety 
and so requires an appropriate safety categorisation / classification to be assigned.  
This categorisation / classification (or grading) will affect the design methods and 
standards, material selection, procurement process, fabrication and installation 
inspections as well as maintenance requirements and in service inspections. 

In any engineering process, the resource available (whether it be in time or budget) 
relating to required activities such as design is always limited.  It is therefore 
appropriate that such resource is targeted at areas which have the greatest potential 
for danger.  This is the basis for all engineering safety categorisation / classification 
systems. 

Design requirements and regulation  

Design requirements arise generally for the following reasons: 

  The licensee wishes to design, construct, install and commission a facility on a new 
site, or within an existing site.  Licence conditions 19, 20 and 21 are specifically 
applicable to this scenario, as well as the requirements for site licensing for new sites. 
 
  The licensee wishes to undertake a modification to an existing facility.  Licence 
condition 22 is specifically applicable to this scenario.  
 
  The licensee is conducting an assessment of structures, systems and components 
for a periodic safety review.  Licence condition 15 is specifically applicable to this 
scenario. 
 
  The licensee wishes to decommission a facility.  Licence condition 35 is specifically 
applicable to this scenario. 

Early regulatory involvement in the design process can provide assurance that the 
necessary arrangements are in place to ensure safety, as well as provide preliminary 
indications as to whether the final design solution will be satisfactory. 
 
For new build it may be a vendor who is responsible for design development and 
control prior to the appointment of a licensee.  Under these circumstances the vendor’s 
design management process may still be subject to regulatory review, and a regulatory 
strategy should be developed for this which should take cognisance of the guidance 
provided in this document. 

Design process 

6.6 

The design process can be a complex undertaking, involving parties from different 
disciplines who contribute to the overall design product.  This design process will vary 
between disciplines, but issues of key importance are listed as follows, with discussion 
in the subsequent paragraphs: 

 
 

Design Phases (5.7)  
Hazard Identification (5.8)  

 
 
 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 5 of 16 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Optioneering (5.9)  
Safety Functional Requirements and Design Parameters (5.10)  
Design Planning and Organisation (5.11)  
Design Standards (5.12)  
Design Verification and Validation (5.13)  
The Interface with Procurement (5.14)  
The Interfaces between Design Disciplines (5.15)  
Information Control and Document Management (5.16)  
Change Control (5.17)  
Competency (5.18)  
The Interface with Construction/Installation (5.19)  
The Interface with Commissioning (5.20)  
The Interface with Maintenance and Inspection (5.21)  
Safety Case Production and Interface (5.22)  
Design Review (5.23)  
Design Instructions (5.24)  
Fault Recording and Corrective Action Systems (5.25)  
Intelligent Customer and Design Authority (5.26)  
Human Factors (5.27)  
Design Quality Assurance (5.28)  
Design for Decommissioning (5.29)  

 
Design phases 

6.7 

A well structured design process is the starting point for a successful design output.  
The design process should clearly integrate with the safety case production process.  
There must be a regular two way interaction with the safety case authors such that the 
designers recognise the need for risks associated with design solutions to be ALARP, 
with clear evidence of optioneering.  Early input from facility operators and 
maintenance organisations is also necessary.  It is important to recognise the safety 
significance of elements of the design to determine the rigour of the safety review.  It 
must be recognised that the design process is generally iterative, and the key 
requirement is that the risk associated with the overall functional solution is ALARP.  
Attempts to justify individual ‘building blocks’ of the overall design solution to ALARP 
criteria may not be helpful.  The safety case authors need to keep abreast of the 
developing design solutions and associated detail to ensure that the claims made in 
the safety case remain valid and accurate.  A typical design process and integrated 
safety justification should proceed as follows: 

  Inception and initial brief  
  Feasibility studies and optioneering  
  Conceptual design → Preliminary Safety Report  
  Scheme design → Design freeze  
  Detailed design → Design freeze → Pre Construction Safety Report  

 

It is necessary that key research and development outputs are available at an early 
stage in the process in order to allow the design to evolve in a logical progression. 
 
The concept of design freeze is an important control tool in the design process, 
although it should be recognised that it does not, and should not impose absolute 
constraints on changes beyond this point.  However, any such changes to frozen 
information should be formally justified and the implications assessed, particularly from 
a safety perspective, and thoroughly integrated into the modified design if the change 
is adopted.  The degree of rigour required in the assessment of proposed changes and 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 6 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

6.8 

the associated implementation should be commensurate with their associated safety 
significance. 
 
It should be noted in the above description that when the Pre Construction Safety 
Report is produced, the detailed design would generally be ‘frozen’, making changes 
difficult from a time and cost perspective.  This reinforces the need for early regulatory 
interest in the design process.  It is essential that the regulator is made aware of 
design changes subsequent to the issue of a licence instrument, as part of the 
regulatory process. 
 
The design process will also integrate into the overall project management process 
and project sanctioning process.  A number of project ‘gates’ may need to be 
successfully negotiated for the project to proceed, requiring specific design and safety 
case deliverables.  Continuity of design resource may be an issue as a result of this 
process. 

The design process should also incorporate features known to promote high reliability 
within organisational due processes, such as diversity and redundancy. 

Hazard identification 

Early hazard identification is an important part of design safety assurance and can 
utilise many different inductive and deductive techniques that are undertaken at 
appropriate project design stages.  One standard format is a ‘structured brainstorm’ to 
identify hazards, followed by a risk assessment process to quantify the worst credible 
consequence and associated likelihood, usually expressed as a frequency for 
cumulative risk.  Consequential risks, after the application of safeguards, are then 
assessed and determined to be either intolerable, within the ALARP region, or in the 
broadly acceptable region.  It is important that identified safeguards, plus other 
measures subsequently developed following the hazard identification process are 
recorded and tracked through to conclusion, to ensure adequate implementation.  A 
hazard schedule, which should be treated as a live document, is generally a good way 
to achieve this. 

Fundamentally hazards should be eliminated and reduced by design where 
practicable, and most benefit in this respect is usually achieved at the early conceptual 
design stage. 
 
It should be recognised however that although beneficial, document based hazard 
identification studies are limited in that they sometimes fail to recognise complex 
interactions between structures, systems and components.  They should therefore be 
complemented by other methods of hazard identification such as virtual plant 
walkdowns, plus actual walkdowns during construction/installation and commissioning. 
 
It is important that the hazard identification process provides a high degree of 
confidence that it can identify all credible postulated initiating events. 
 
As the process develops, further risk assessments should be undertaken in an 
appropriate format to maintain the safety integrity of the design solutions. 
 
The SAPs FA series (Fault analysis) and WENRA reference level E (Design Basis 
Envelope for Existing Reactors) are applicable to Hazard Identification. 

 
 
 

 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

 
 
 

Page 7 of 16 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Optioneering 

6.9 

 

 

 

Optioneering is an essential early part of any design process, in order to ensure and 
demonstrate that solutions are ALARP.  Optioneering is a very common project 
management technique, but can often focus on issues of cost, functionality and 
programme without specifically addressing safety.  The legal requirement to satisfy the 
ALARP principle means that options related to safety should be addressed as part of 
the overall design solution.  However, optioneering needs to be controlled from a 
design management perspective during the later detailed design phases in order that 
the activity can be focused and moved forward, without each step being excessively 
challenged in detail.  Furthermore, it should be recognised that optioneering at a 
microscopic level can be counterproductive and may not generally yield the best 
macroscopic solution, with a practical economy of effort. 
 
The SAPs NT series (Numerical targets and legal limits) is applicable to Optioneering. 

Safety functional requirements and design parameters 

6.10  Safety functional requirements are deterministic rules which are generated during the 
start of the design activity, which are considered necessary to ensure safety by 
identifying the specific safety requirements associated with structures, systems and 
components important to safety.  These can cascade from high level safety 
requirements, to a larger number of lower level functional demands on individual 
structures, systems and components.  The design should follow these requirements 
and update them as necessary as part of the process.  These requirements should be 
confirmed during commissioning and then feed in to the operating rules and 
instructions as described by licence conditions 23 and 24. 

Associated with safety functional requirements is the process whereby design 
parameters are established, to define the design duty of the structures, systems and 
components under consideration.  In addition to categorising / classifying designs in 
accordance with SAPs, physical parameters should be established to define design 
duties, such as temperature, load combinations, damage and aging mechanisms, 
environmental considerations, design life considerations etc.  This links to the overall 
consideration of equipment qualification. 
 
The SAPs ECS series (Safety classification and standards) and WENRA reference 
level G (Safety Classification of Structures, Systems and Components) are applicable 
to Safety Functional Requirements and Design Parameters. 

Design Planning and Organisation 

6.11  A well structured and resourced delivery plan/programme is a key part of a well 

executed design process.  As such it leads directly to ensuring that safety is 
incorporated into the design output, by identifying safety process requirements, such 
as Hazops and safety case integration for example, as well as by facilitating a well 
organised, coordinated process, without which safety cannot be demonstrated and 
indeed may not be achieved.  This plan should identify key inputs, formal design 
outputs, interdependencies, timescales plus resource requirements, generally in terms 
of design effort.  The resource considerations should also address internal design 
skills, internal facilities, external skills and facilities (if consultants are used) plus the 
overall design organisation.  A well structured, up to date and well communicated 
design organisation, evidenced through an organisation chart is a prerequisite for an 
effective process. 

 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

 
 
 

Page 8 of 16 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Design activities tend to be organised as either dedicated project teams, with 
personnel mixed from different technical disciplines, or as small project 
management/engineering groupings drawing on effort from functional teams, 
organised on a discipline basis.  Often organisations operate with a mixture of both 
characteristics.  Functional characteristics can bring significant safety assurance 
benefits in terms of providing collective functional knowledge, robust verification 
processes, collective competency and standardisation, but can have the disadvantage 
of discouraging good communication within the project leading to a ‘silo’ mentality.  
 
The design programme should be integrated into the overall project and safety case 
programmes, with specific links to procurement and construction/installation to ensure 
an effective overall project is achieved.  It is also important that suitable checks are in 
place for the review and questioning of input information, such that it is not blindly 
incorporated into the design when it might be erroneous.  This contributes to the 
defence in depth, which is an inherent feature of a highly reliable process. 
 
Where design is undertaken at various levels of detail by different organisations, it is 
important to recognise that the Design Authority resides at the highest level, with 
overall responsibility for the functionality of the completed design product.   

It is important that the licensee Design Authority should participate in all interactions 
between Responsible Designers and the ONR, in order to ensure that the licensee 
develops and maintains this Design Authority capability. 
 
The design facility makes a significant contribution to an effective design process, and 
support resource in terms of personnel and equipment are important factors.  Access 
to technical information is also very important, including availability of historical 
information. 
 
Overall design resource numbers, as well as continuity, turnover, training and morale 
are significant issues in terms of design safety assurance.  Training is a particularly 
important issue, and should cover not only introduction to new issues, but refresher 
training to maintain the ‘conscious competence’ mode of operation.  Training should 
also cover physical appreciation of the designed structures, systems and components, 
and application within the intended facility. 
 
The SAPs MS series (Leadership and management for safety) and WENRA reference 
level B (Operating Organisation) are applicable to Design Planning and Organisation. 

Design Standards 

 

 

6.12  Establishing appropriate technical standards to underpin the design process is an 

essential early activity, which clearly has significant safety implications.  A range of 
standards exists for nuclear design application, including IAEA standards, 
International, European and British standards as well as in house developed 
standards, (some with accepted general application with the UK nuclear industry).  It is 
important that the design organisations have an up to date knowledge of the range of 
available standards, and are able to demonstrate a mature selection process for the 
specific design application.  Selected standards must be effectively communicated 
within the design organisation, with training requirements identified and implemented 
as necessary.  Changes to standards must also be effectively assessed, 
communicated and implemented, (although a design standards freeze may also be put 
in place). 

The SAPs ECS series (Safety classification and standards) and WENRA reference 
level C (Quality Management) are applicable to Design Standards. 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 9 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Design verification and validation 

6.13  Design verification is the process whereby each stage of the design is confirmed as 

correct against the requirements from the previous stage.  This generally entails a 
process of checking and approval.  Two standard checking methods are usually 
applied, either a direct check of the calculation or design method, following the original 
philosophy, or alternatively a check by a parallel method or calculation.  Generally the 
parallel method provides for a higher level of assurance, preventing a purely 
arithmetical check being undertaken for example, on what may be an erroneous 
philosophy.  However, a parallel check does not check intermediate results in detail 
and so caution must be applied if these values are subsequently used.  A 
complementary method of verification is by comparison with existing, proven design, 
although if this is used as the sole method of verification then the process must be 
extremely rigorous.  The assurance of design verification can be categorised by 
assigning a checking category level, ranging from checks within the originating design 
teams, to independent checks undertaken by external organisations. 

The hierarchy of verification is generally undertaken in a three tier structure, with an 
originator, checker and approver.  The function of the approver from a verification 
perspective is to confirm there are no obvious errors, to ensure that the design output 
is consistent with other design elements, and to confirm the competency of the 
originator and checker and that the correct level of checking has been applied.  Further 
tiers in the verification process can be counterproductive in diluting the level of 
individual responsibility and ownership.  Notwithstanding the above, a culture of self 
verification, i.e. ‘checking your own work’, is evident in the most effective design 
organisations. 
 
Design validation ensures that the overall intent of the design is achieved, and 
prevents failure of this objective by incremental deviation or dilution.  This is achieved 
by a combination of independent technical assessment, peer review, design review, 
staged testing and commissioning plus operating trials. 
 
Where software applications are used in the design process, rigorous software 
validation requirements must be in force, including for well structured version control.  
Design packages can be bought in externally or developed internally, using a range of 
software platforms, but the fundamental validation requirements are unchanged.  
Where commercial design software is used, it may be appropriate to run separate 
design codes as a form of validation.  Challenges to the safety assurance of the design 
process can readily evolve from the uncontrolled growth and use of small, bespoke 
software routines, which have not been formally validated or controlled.  Software 
should only be used for analyses within the bounds of its specified application and 
associated validation, and the results subjected to sanity checks by simplified 
calculations as necessary.  

The interface with procurement 

 

 

6.14  The interface with procurement is key to ensuring that the delivered structures, 

systems and components match the design intent.  This requires robust systems for 
identifying products and materials in the first instance, and inspection systems to 
ensure that the material specified is correctly delivered by the supplier (see NS-TAST-
GD-077 Procurement of Nuclear Safety Related Items or Services).  Inspection 
systems are also required to verify the engineering functionality and can include type 
tests, batch sample tests plus routine tests (including proof tests).  Tests can be 
undertaken at the factory (Factory Acceptance Tests, FATs) and on site (Site 
Acceptance Tests, SATs), as well as suitable tests on civil structures during the 
construction phases (e.g. concrete cube tests). Tests may be destructive or non 
 
 
 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 10 of 16 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

destructive, and samples from the destructive process should be fully destroyed to 
prevent inadvertent re-use.  It is very important that such tests are well designed such 
that they mimic as closely as practicable the duties imposed on the structures, systems 
and components on which the design has been based, and meet specified standards 
as necessary.  It should also be noted that there is considerable scope for 
misunderstanding regarding terminology associated with testing, and the specifications 
and arrangements for testing should be given a commensurate degree of technical 
effort to prevent this, in addition to quality assurance requirements. 

Arrangements are also required to ensure that non conformances in respect of 
equipment and materials are adequately assessed and sentenced as appropriate.  
These arrangements should ensure that the potential non conformance is adequately 
recognised, categorised in terms of its safety significance, assessed at the correct 
level of technical competence and the resulting sentencing adequately implemented.  
The aggregate of a series of non conformances should also be captured within the 
process, both as evidence of potential systemic process problems, as well as 
identifying the cumulative effect on safety. 
 
The SAPs EQU series (Equipment qualification) and WENRA reference level C 
(Quality Management) are applicable to the Interface with Procurement. 

The interfaces between design disciplines 

6.15  The interfaces between design disciplines are important from a safety perspective, 

specifically where design covers multidisciplinary areas.  Some form of interdisciplinary 
check would be a firm expectation as part of any design process.  Furthermore, in 
addition to processes to control detailed interfaces, it is important that suitably 
competent engineers have an overview of the whole designed system to ensure key 
issues are not missed. 

Information control and document management 

6.16 

Information control, configuration control and document management are critical 
requirements where large numbers of design documents are produced as part of the 
process. Licence condition 17 requires adequate arrangements to be made in respect 
of Quality Assurance, QA. Licence condition 6 also requires adequate records to be 
made in respect of compliance to any licence condition.  Documentation, whether in 
hard copy or electronic format is the fundamental output of any design process and a 
significant effort is required to ensure that such information is clear, comprehensive 
and unambiguous.  The following issues are relevant to this subject from a safety 
perspective: 

  Document identification  
  Version control  
  Presentation format including use of colours  
  Projection methods and orientation  
  Terminology  
  Symbols  
  Distribution  
  Retention and availability of access to lifetime records  
  Production of ‘as fitted/as built’ records  

WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to the issue of 
Information Control and Document Management. 

 

 

 

 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

 
 
 

Page 11 of 16 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Change control 

 

6.17  The management of change is a key part of the design process, from the early stages 
when the process may still be highly iterative, to the later stages where the volume of 
design information may be substantial.  An understanding of the way in which the 
design information is structured or configured is also important in recognising the 
practical way that agreed changes should be implemented through the design system.  
The general principles of design change control and associated configuration 
management are as follows: 

  Recognition of change  
  Understanding the safety impact of change  
  Agreement of change at the correct authority level  
  Controlled implementation and communication of change  
  Update of necessary documentation  

 

 

 

As the design matures, agreement and authorisation of change is generally 
undertaken at more senior levels within the organisation.  Once the procurement and 
construction cycles have commenced, the impact of potential changes from the design 
process are greatly magnified, as are the difficulties in correctly implementing such 
changes that are agreed.  However, a mindset which automatically resists change due 
to its inherent difficulty will have a negative effect on safety assurance by the possibility 
of failing to recognise and sentence changes which are required. 
 
The potential impact on safety can be substantial due to incorrect management of 
changes, which are consequently inadequately conceived and/or executed. 

Competency 

6.18  Licence condition 12 requires that only Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons, 

(SQEPs), should perform any duties that may affect safety.  This requirement also 
affects designers and so the design resource should be subject to a competency 
management system.  This system should recognise the skills, technical discipline and 
experience of the designers and design management should ensure that activities are 
only undertaken by suitably qualified and experienced personnel. 

WENRA reference level B (Operating Organisation) is applicable to the issue of 
Competency. 

The interface with construction/installation 

6.19  The design process should clearly link to the construction/installation process, such 

that adequate information is provided to the construction teams, and a process should 
be established whereby queries raised by these teams can be fed back and assessed 
by the designers.  The use of field engineers with design office experience is 
recommended to fulfil this interface function.  Recognition of changes requiring design 
review is fundamental.  Licence conditions 19 and 20 have particular relevance to this 
issue. Arrangements are necessary in this area to ensure that non conformances are 
recognised, assessed at the correct level and duly sentenced by a controlled process. 

The interface with commissioning 

6.20  The design process should also link to the commissioning process, such that adequate 
information is provided to the commissioning teams, and a process should be 
established whereby queries raised by these teams can be fed back and assessed by 
the designers. The use of commissioning engineers with design office experience is 
recommended to fulfil this interface function, with suitable input from future operators 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 12 of 16 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

as part of the process. Recognition of changes requiring design review is fundamental.  
Licence condition 21 has particular relevance to this issue. Arrangements are 
necessary in this area to ensure that non conformances are recognised, assessed at 
the correct level and duly sentenced by a controlled process.  

The commissioning process should confirm the assumptions made and requirements 
identified through the design process. 
 
The SAPs ECM series (Commissioning) is applicable to the Interface with 
Commissioning. 

The Interface with Maintenance and Inspection 

6.21  The design process should identify the requirements for examination, inspection, 
maintenance and testing of structures, systems and components as necessary to 
assure their continued safe operation.  Due regard should be made during the design 
process to visibility and accessibility of structures, systems and components to meet 
this requirement. Specific attention should also be paid to facilitate the replacement of 
items which are intended to be renewed within the design life of the overall facility.  
Licence condition 28 has particular relevance to this issue. 

The SAPs EMT series (Maintenance, inspection and testing) and WENRA reference 
level K (Maintenance, In-service inspection and Functional Testing) are applicable to 
the Interface with Maintenance and Inspection. 

Safety case production and interface 

6.22  The design process must lead to production of safety documentation that achieves the 
necessary level of assurance and reference should be made to the relevant BMS 
guidance. 

Generally the safety case format should follow the claim, evidence, argument logical 
justification chain, whereby the design process should seek to primarily provide 
evidence in terms of design information and parameters. 
 
Where existing facilities are subject to upgrade programmes, then establishing a firm 
understanding of the present state of the facility and original design intent is an 
important input into the design and safety case production activities.  Where this 
information is not readily available, this can be achieved as part of formalised 
engineering substantiation processes. 
 
The SAPs SC series (Safety cases) and WENRA reference level N (Contents and 
updating of Safety Analysis Report) are applicable to Safety Case Production and 
Interface. 

Design review 

6.23  Design review is a core requirement of any quality management system.  At suitable 

planned stages, formal reviews should be undertaken to confirm the validity of the 
design, to act as a forum for information transfer and to identify problem areas and to 
give direction to solutions.  It is important that such reviews are given a high level of 
support and importance, with participation from procurement and 
construction/installation disciplines where practicable.  Typically a design review 
should ensure the following: 

  The requirements of the brief have been identified and are being met  
  Appropriate design acceptance criteria have been established and are being met  

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 13 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

  The safety justification process is integrated into the design process  
  Correct design parameters have been established  
  The design identifies appropriate materials and products  
  Appropriate and referenced design documentation is being produced  
  The design identifies suitable limits and conditions of operation and safety  

Design instructions 

6.24  Formal procedures should be in place to ensure that design instructions, including 

those issued to installation teams which are not captured by other suitable documents, 
are put in place.  Such instructions are often generated from the need for direction in 
advance of formal incorporation into other design generated documentation.  
Nevertheless, these instructions should be formally generated, verified as appropriate 
and adequately controlled and distributed.  It would be expected that they be 
incorporated into other formal documentation at an appropriate stage. 

Fault Recording and Corrective Action Systems 

6.25  Formal processes should be in place to ensure that design associated faults and 

potential improvements identified from procurement, construction, installation, 
commissioning plus final operation and maintenance are fed back to the designers for 
consideration.  This process is sometimes termed a Fault Recording and Corrective 
Action System.  This consideration should generally follow the following model: 

  Record and understand the fault  
  Identify what action is required for existing designs/materials/installations on the 
project  
  Identify what action is required for future designs/materials/installations on the 
project  
  Identify what changes to design processes may be necessary for the future in 
general  

From an overall perspective, ‘lessons learned’ workshops can provide a valuable 
learning format to ensure that difficulties are minimised for the future.  These 
workshops should also identify positive features, as well as areas for improvement, to 
ensure that good practice is repeated in the future. 
 
WENRA reference level J (System for Investigation of Events and Operational 
Experience Feedback) is applicable to the issue of Fault Recording and Corrective 
Action Systems. 

Intelligent Customer and Design Authority 

 

 

 

6.26  The design knowledge should be retained in a form that is practically retrievable and 

understandable for the lifetime of the facility’s operational and decommissioning 
periods.  The licensee Design Authority responsibility includes maintaining the 
necessary engineering skills and knowledge, implementation of appropriate research, 
and dealing with intellectual property issues as necessary.  

Where design is contracted out, it is important that the licensee retains the role of 
Design Authority, including Intelligent Customer capability, so as to correctly specify 
the design requirements, monitor the design delivery process and validate the output.  
Retention of corporate knowledge is closely associated with this issue.  This role of 
Design Authority and Intelligent Customer capability extends to the review of third party 
design consultants where they are used by the non licensee design house 
(Responsible Designer), as well as the interfaces with procurement and 
construction/installation. 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 14 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Reference should be made to NS-TAST-GD-079, which addresses ONR’s 
expectations for existing and prospective licensees’ Design Authority capability. 
 
WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to the issue of 
Intelligent Customer and Design Authority. 

Human factors 

6.27  Human factors are an important consideration for the design process.  The designed 
structures, systems and components should pay due recognition to human factors in 
terms of installation, subsequent operation and maintenance.  Designers can 
sometimes create assemblies which only ‘work’ in their final configuration, without due 
recognition of how they can be safely assembled or maintained.  Furthermore, since 
the mindset is generally one of ensuring that configurations do successfully work, 
designers sometimes fail to question how they could be misused or fail, in terms of 
systematically assessing what could go wrong at a detailed level. 

Human factors input should be made to the design process to ensure that demands on 
operators to operate the equipment, maintain it and respond to failures are adequately 
assessed.  Physical as well as theoretical models can play an important part in linking 
the design concepts to human factors issues, in terms of the final configuration. 
 
Where necessary, guidance should be sought from specialist human factors 
practitioners. 
 
The SAPs EHF series (Human factors) is applicable to the issue of Human Factors. 

Design quality assurance 

6.28  Design activities must be internally regulated by current and controlled quality 

assurance procedures which are accessible to all users.  These procedures should be 
enforced by a visible internal auditing regime, with evidence of observations and 
corrective action requirements as appropriate.  As with all quality assurance auditing 
processes, there should be evidence of effective action and close out of issues to 
demonstrate a robust process. 

WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to Design Quality 
Assurance. 

Design for decommissioning 

6.29  Design solutions should take due recognition of the need for future decommissioning 

of facilities and equipment.  This may include the need to replace equipment which 
becomes life expired, within the overall facility design life, in addition to 
decommissioning the facility as a whole.  It should be recognised that the attributes 
which may provide straightforward decommissioning may run counter to those which 
are necessary to ensure safety during the operational lifetime of the facility, e.g. 
seismic capability may require substantial structural engineering solutions, which are 
challenging to decommission.  Recognition of the future requirement however at the 
design stage will allow the optimum solution to be achieved, whilst ensuring safety at 
all stages.  Licence condition 35 has specific relevance to this issue. 

The SAPs DC series (Decommissioning) is applicable to the issue of Design for 
Decommissioning. 
 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 15 of 16 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

7. 

SUMMARY 

7.1 

This guidance has been produced to advise the reader of key elements within a design 
process for items important to safety, primarily for application within the nuclear 
environment. 

The detailed features of the design process itself will vary between disciplines and 
projects, but this document addresses the key elements which should be present in an 
effective design organisation that produces design solutions that will be demonstrably 
safe.  The elements can be sampled, assessed and inspected to the necessary degree 
of rigour, as part of the regulatory process, to provide assurance of nuclear safety. 

 
8. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND FURTHER READING 

1  Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended).  

2  Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974.  

3  Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007.  

4  Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017.  

5  Office for Nuclear Regulation – Licence Condition handbook, ONR website.  

6  The Tolerability of Risk from Nuclear Power Stations, Revised 1992.  

7  Reducing risk, protecting people, HSE’s decision-making process, 2001.  

8  Quality management systems – Requirements, BS EN ISO 9001:2008.  

9  Quality Assurance for Safety in Nuclear Power Plants and other Nuclear. 
Installations, Codes and Safety Guides Q1-Q14, Safety Series No 50-C/SG-Q, IAEA, 
Vienna 2001.  

10  Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design Specific Safety Requirements, SSR-2/1,  
2012: IAEA Safety Standards Series. 

11  Design management systems, BS 7000. 

 
 
 
 

BS 7000-1:2008 Guide to managing innovation 
BS 7000-2: 2015 Guide to managing the design of manufactured products  
BS 7000-4: 2013 Guide to managing design in construction  
BS 7000-10: 2008 Vocabulary of terms used in design management 

12  DOE Standard Configuration Management, US Department of Energy website, ref 
DOE-STD-1073-2003.  

13  Maintaining the Design Integrity of Nuclear Installations throughout their Operating 
Life, INSAG-19, IAEA, 2003.  
14  Licensing Nuclear Installations, 4th Edition: January 2015.The Office for Nuclear 
Regulation.  

15 Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition, Office for Nuclear 
Regulation.  

16  WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels for Existing Reactors, Western 
European Nuclear Regulators’ Association, September 2014.  

 
 

Report  NS-TAST-GD-057 
TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 

Page 16 of 16 

 
 
 

