Guidance on the Demonstration of ALARP ns-tast-gd-005.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ONR GUIDE 

Guidance on the Demonstration of ALARP (As Low As Reasonably Practicable) 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 

Date Issued: 

December 2019 

Review Date: 

December 2022 

Approved by: 

S Turner 

Principal Inspector, ALARP WG Chair 

Record Reference: 

CM9 2019/315236 

Revision commentary: 

This document has been updated to add a new appendix on 
relevant good practice and correct references to IRRs.   

 

 
1. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 

STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 5 

5.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – GENERAL POINTS ............................................................. 6 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – DETAILED REQUIREMENTS ............................................. 8 

7.  ALARP AND REGULATORY DECISIONS ........................................................................ 18 

8.  CHECKLIST ....................................................................................................................... 19 

9.  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 20 

10. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 21 

11. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 12/19 
 
 
 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 29 

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

1.4 

2.1 

3.1 

This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) represents specific guidance for ONR 
inspectors on what they should expect of a nuclear licensee or dutyholder1 in meeting 
its legal requirement to reduce risks so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP).  The 
concept of SFAIRP is normally expressed in terms of reducing risks to “As Low As 
Reasonably Practicable” (ALARP), the terms SFAIRP and ALARP being synonymous 
in guidance documents. 

This TAG is part of a sequence of documents, headed by “Reducing Risks, Protecting 
People” [R2P2] and the series of ALARP Guides for use by health and safety 
inspectors published on our websites. It is intended that ONR inspectors make use of 
all these documents when considering licensees' cases or arguments. 

The requirement for risks to be ALARP is fundamental and applies to all activities 
within the scope of the Health and Safety at Work (etc) Act 1974 [HSWA]. It is 
important that inspectors in whatever role are aware of the need to ensure that 
licensees meet this requirement where it applies. In simple terms it is a requirement to 
take all measures to reduce risk where doing so is reasonable. In most cases this is 
not done through an explicit comparison of costs and benefits, but rather by applying 
established relevant good practice and standards. The development of relevant good 
practice and standards includes ALARP considerations so in many cases meeting 
them is sufficient. In other cases, either where standards and relevant good practice 
are less evident or not fully applicable, the onus is on the licensee to implement 
measures to the point where the costs of any additional measures (in terms of money, 
time or trouble – the sacrifice) would be grossly disproportionate to the further risk 
reduction that would be achieved (the safety benefit). 

To aid use of this TAG in regulatory activities, a checklist is provided in Annex 1 which 
references back to the appropriate text in the main body of the TAG. It is recognised 
that it is unlikely that all of the check points in Annex 1 will apply in any single case – 
inspectors will need to select those that are appropriate to the specific circumstances. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

The purpose of this Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is to provide advice to ONR 
inspectors to help them judge whether a licensee has met the requirement to reduce 
risks to ALARP. As such, the TAG is intended to be used for all ONR regulatory 
functions relating to nuclear safety falling within the remit of the HSWA.  

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

HSWA provides the basic legislation for health and safety related to work activities. 
The HSWA places duties on employers to ensure the health, safety and welfare of 
their employees (Section 2) and to conduct their operations so that persons not in their 
employment are not exposed to risks to their health and safety (Section 3). The 
employer is required to ensure that these duties are met "so far as is reasonably 
practicable". This principle, abbreviated to SFAIRP, is therefore the basic legal 
requirement to which an employer needs to conform. ALARP (the term used in 
HSE/ONR guidance) and SFAIRP require the same tests to be applied and are 
effectively the same thing, though the terms are not interchangeable in legal 
proceedings (which must employ the wording in the legislation). 

                                                 
1 Hereafter, in the interests of brevity, “licensee” should be interpreted as meaning licensee or dutyholder as 
appropriate to the circumstances 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 2 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

The parts of the Nuclear Installations Act we are concerned with became Relevant 
Statutory Provisions of the Energy Act 2013, rather than HSWA, on 1 April 2014; the 
impacts of this and related changes do not affect the guidance in this TAG.  

It is important to recognise that not all the legal duties licensees need to meet are 
qualified by SFAIRP – so ONR’s ALARP guidance should only be applied where this 
qualification is in place.  For example, the duties in various Licence Conditions, which 
are now applicable provisions of the Energy Act 2013, to make and implement 
adequate arrangements are not qualified by SFAIRP. 

Nevertheless, the demonstration of ALARP will normally be made within the licensee’s 
safety case required under Licence Condition 23.  The need to demonstrate ALARP 
also arises in other legislation.  For instance, specific legal requirements in relation to 
radiation protection are contained in the Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017 [IRR], 
which put into UK law the 2013 Basic Safety Standard Directive. IRR Regulation 9 
requires that exposure should be restricted SFAIRP. Other relevant legislation is 
contained in the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, which 
requires a suitable and sufficient risk assessment, and in the Control of Major Accident 
Hazards Regulations 1999 [COMAH]. 

This TAG is written against the background of R2P2
documents published on the Internet which give guidance to health and safety 
inspectors on ALARP. This TAG extends the wider guidance to specific aspects of how 
ONR operates, the use of a licensing regime and other ONR guidance on inspection 
and assessment. Thus R2P2, the Internet guides (listed below) and this TAG taken 
together represent ONR guidance to our inspectors on ALARP.  

 [1] and the supporting 

This document assists in implementing Council Directive 2014/87/Euratom of 8 July 
2014 amending Directive 2009/71/Euratom, by highlighting ONR’s regulatory 
expectations regarding the achievement of nuclear safety and as reference for the 
timely implementation of reasonably practicable safety improvements (see Articles 
below) by nuclear site licence holders and, in particular, demonstrating that the IAEA 
and WENRA Safety Objectives and Reference Levels underpin the UK’s regulatory 
oversight of nuclear safety (See Section 4 and paragraph 4.6.)  

Article 8a Nuclear safety objective for nuclear installations  

8a (1) Member States shall ensure that the national nuclear safety framework requires 
that  nuclear  installations  are  designed,  sited,  constructed,  commissioned,  operated 
and  decommissioned  with  the  objective  of  preventing  accidents  and,  should  an 
accident occur, mitigating its consequences and avoiding:  

(a)  early  radioactive  releases  that  would  require  off-site  emergency  measures 
but with insufficient time to implement them;  

(b) large radioactive releases that would require protective measures that could 
not be limited in area or time. 

8a (2) Member States shall ensure that the national framework requires that the 
objective set out in paragraph 1:  
 

(a) applies to nuclear installations for which a construction licence is granted for 
the first time after 14 August 2014;  

 

(b) is used as a reference for the timely implementation of reasonably 
practicable safety improvements to existing nuclear installations, including in 
the framework of the periodic safety reviews as defined in Article 8c(b). 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 3 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3.7 

R2P2 sets out HSE's overall framework for decision-making to aid consistency and 
coherence across the full range of risks falling within the scope of the HSWA. This 
framework represents our risk management policy and is based on "The Tolerability of 
Risks from Nuclear Power Stations" (TOR)
 published in 1992 [2]. TOR defines risks 
which are so high they are unacceptable unless there are exceptional circumstances, 
and risks which are so low that they may be considered broadly acceptable so that in 
most cases it would be disproportionate to apply regulatory time to reduce them 
further. Between these levels inspectors should consider whether risks have been 
reduced to ALARP, while recognising that the legal duty for risks to be ALARP is not 
limited to this range.  

3.8 

R2P2 explains our decision making process rather than providing guidance to 
individual dutyholders. The approach is essentially risk-based and R2P2 addresses the 
qualitative and quantitative role of risk assessment and the key role of good practice in 
determining control measures. Based on legal precedent, R2P2 considers risk to 
include the "possibility of danger", though the terminology used in our guidance calls 
things that present the possibility of danger “a hazard”. 

3.9 

The HSE ALARP guides published on the Internet (colloquially known as “the ALARP 
six-pack”) are: 

3.10  PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES TO ASSIST HSE IN ITS JUDGEMENTS THAT 

DUTYHOLDERS HAVE REDUCED RISK AS LOW AS REASONABLY PRACTICABLE [3] 
This paper defines ALARP and SFAIRP and sets out in plain terms what HSE believes 
the law requires. 

3.11  ASSESSING COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW IN INDIVIDUAL CASES AND THE USE OF 

GOOD PRACTICE [4] This paper defines what HSE means by good practice and lists 
the responsibilities of Operating Directorates (which includes ONR) in respect of 
identifying and maintaining records of good practice. 

3.12  POLICY AND GUIDANCE ON REDUCING RISKS AS LOW AS REASONABLY 

PRACTICABLE IN DESIGN [5]. This paper recognises the importance of taking account 
of health and safety in design and sets out HSE's intervention policy with respect to 
design. At licensed sites, intervention in the design is controlled by licence conditions 
attached under the powers of the NIA, and is a well established process (see 
T/AST/051 [25] and Nuclear Site Licensees Notes for Applicants
Sites, HSWA Section 6 and the Construction, Design and Management Regulations 
2007 [CDM] should be used. 

 [6]).  For Authorised 

3.13  HSE PRINCIPLES FOR COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS IN SUPPORT OF ALARP DECISIONS 
[7]. This paper explains the uses and limitations of CBA and is particularly concerned 
with the correct use of CBA as part of ALARP decisions. 

3.14  HSE - RISK MANAGEMENT: ALARP AT A GLANCE [8]. This document summarises many 

of the key terms and concepts. 

3.15  HSE - RISK MANAGEMENT: COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS (CBA) CHECKLIST [9]. This 

document summarises HSE's view of what should and should not be considered in a 
dutyholder's CBA for health and safety ALARP determinations. 

3.16  NIA provides for ONR to attach Licence Conditions to a site licence in the interests of 

safety and with respect to the handling, treatment, and disposal of nuclear matter. 
Licence Condition 14 requires arrangements to "produce and assess safety cases .... 
to justify safety" and Licence Condition 23 requires an adequate safety case be 
produced and that the facility is then operated in accordance with that safety case. 
These safety cases still need to address the duty to reduce risks to ALARP from 
HSWA. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 4 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3.17  Under the IRRs, the licensee has to carry out a risk assessment prior to commencing 

work with ionising radiation, review progress during the job (for example tracking a 
dose budget) and consider plant, procedures and training aspects.  A prime aim of 
these prior risk assessments, along with demonstrating legal limits on exposure etc. 
will be complied with, should be to ensure the risks, particularly those due to expected 
radiological exposures from the planned activities, will be reduced to ALARP. 

3.18  Many decisions on what is needed to meet ALARP for conventional (i.e. non-

radiological) safety are made at the time regulations are being written and judgements 
of acceptability can therefore often be made directly against the requirements of those 
regulations (although the legal duty to reduce risks SFAIRP still remains). 

4. 

4.1 

4.2 

4.3 

RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 
STANDARDS ADDRESSED 

The SAPs [10] were developed against the background of the legal requirements and 
the TOR philosophy, and have been benchmarked against the IAEA Safety Standards. 
They contain engineering and operational principles, safety analysis requirements and 
numerical targets and legal limits. The need to demonstrate risks are ALARP is an 
overriding and all-embracing requirement. Paragraph 16 of the SAPs emphasises that 
"The principles are used in helping to judge whether reducing risks to ALARP is 
achieved.......”. This has not been stated in each case to avoid excessive repetition". 
Furthermore it is also a requirement of SAPs that "priority should be given to achieving 
an overall balance of safety rather than satisfying each principle or making an ALARP 
judgement against each principle". The expectation from SAPs is that a safety case 
(see T/AST/051 [25]) should provide an analysis of normal operation, potential faults 
and accidents, and of the engineering design and operations, and demonstrate the 
risks from all these perspectives have been reduced to ALARP. 

The TOR philosophy has been translated into nine Numerical Targets in the form of 
Basic Safety Levels (BSLs) and Basic Safety Objectives (BSOs) (see SAPs para 
695ff). It is however, essential that these are applied against a background of good 
engineering and operational practice. The BSOs represent broadly acceptable levels 
below which regulatory resources will generally not be used to seek further 
improvements, and where assessors should confine themselves to considering the 
validity of the arguments presented (SAPs para 701). This is a pragmatic approach to 
enable targeted and proportionate use of our resources; it is not a green light for 
licensees to forego ALARP considerations at such levels. 

It is ONR policy that a new facility or activity should at least meet the BSLs (note that in 
a few cases the BSLs are legal limits derived from IRRs - these are designated as 
BSL(LL) in SAPs). All the other Targets are policy guidance for inspectors and are not 
mandatory. Older facilities may have been designed and constructed to different safety 
standards and deterioration over time now means that BSLs are exceeded. In these 
cases, provided the BSL is not a legal limit, it may be reasonable for operation to 
continue if:  

i) it has been shown that no reasonably practicable options are available to reduce 
risks further in the short term; and  

ii) a clear longer-term plan to manage and reduce risks within as short a period as 
reasonably practicable is in place.  

4.4 

The criteria for determining whether an explicit ALARP demonstration is required in 
relation to the Engineering SAPs, which represent ONR's views of relevant good 
practice, are not set out in numerical terms. Instead, if the relevant SAP is evidently 
well satisfied, then the facility should be considered to be meeting the equivalent of the 
TOR broadly acceptable criterion on that particular point and therefore there is unlikely 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 5 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

4.5 

4.6 

 

5. 

5.1 

5.2 

to be a need for further assessment against ALARP.  Conversely, any non-
conformance with relevant good practice should be explicitly highlighted and then 
justified as reducing risks to ALARP within the safety case. 

The hierarchy of safety measures set out in the Engineering Key Principles (EKP 1-5 
and supporting guidance, particularly SAPs para 155) will usually be a key part of the 
ALARP analysis. Essentially the SAPs approach is to seek solutions as near to the top 
of the following list as possible: avoid the hazard; design to achieve fault tolerance; 
maintain safe conditions by passive means rather than active systems; initiate 
protection automatically in preference to manually; and mitigate fault consequences. 
This philosophy is also embodied in para 8 of HSE's ALARP in Design paper [5].  

In addition to SAPs, the IAEA Safety Standards and the Safety Reference Levels 
developed by WENRA for reactors, decommissioning, and the storage of radioactive 
waste and spent fuel [21] should be considered to be UK relevant good practice. IAEA 
Safety Standards are developed by international consensus and were used to 
benchmark the  SAPs [10]  The WENRA Reference Levels for reactors are much more 
specific and only apply to existing civil nuclear reactors. However, the 
decommissioning safety reference levels are relevant good practice for all types of 
nuclear facilities and cover all stages in the lifecycle.  The storage reference levels 
apply to facilities where radioactive waste or spent fuel is stored for a significant period 
of time.  The UK, as a member of WENRA, has formally signed on to the Reference 
Levels and, in line with ONR’s enforcement policy [22] in relation to relevant good 
practice, we expect them to be followed. WENRA’s safety objectives for new nuclear 
power plants [26] and guidance on timely implementation of reasonably practicable 
improvements to existing nuclear power plants [27] are also considered to be UK 
relevant good practice.    

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – GENERAL POINTS 

To aid use of this TAG in regulatory activities, a checklist is provided in Annex 1 which 
references back to the appropriate text in the main body of the TAG. It is recognised 
that it is unlikely that all of the check points in Annex 1 will apply in any single case – 
inspectors will need to select those that are appropriate to the specific circumstances. 

Our current advice [3] is that the essence of a demonstration that risks have been 
reduced ALARP is to show that the "costs" (sacrifice) of improving safety any further 
would be grossly disproportionate to the safety benefits that would accrue from 
implementing any identified improvement compared to the status quo. This does not 
mean that a detailed analysis is necessary: the emphasis must be on an analysis 
which is fit for purpose. Neither does it mean that a quantitative argument based on 
risk estimates is always necessary, as qualitative features such as applying 
deterministic engineering principles may be sufficient in making a case. However, ONR 
inspectors should seek suitable and sufficient Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA) in 
addition to deterministic analysis for systems where there are significant hazards and 
complexity. Assessing an ALARP demonstration is essentially a consideration of 
whether an adequate argument has been made that a further reduction in risk would 
not be feasible at a reasonable cost, given the magnitude of the risk. However where 
there are several risks which interact, whether arising from a single hazard or from 
different connected hazards, there may be a need for balancing to achieve the best 
overall solution. 

5.3 

Demonstration of ALARP requires the licensee to evaluate the risks and to consider 
whether it would be reasonably practicable to implement further safety measures 
beyond the initial proposals or what is currently in place. This ought to include the 
consideration of a number of options to identify which is the reasonably practicable 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 6 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

option or collection of options that give the best safety benefit, and making this 
consideration transparent. In reality there may only be a limited number of options for 
dealing with a particular health and safety issue. However, features such as: good 
practice that HSE may have accepted as relevant good practice; an option adopted 
elsewhere in similar circumstances; and the extent to which this option has worked in 
practice, often provide strong indications of what the ALARP solution might be. 

5.4 

The following represent principles which are likely to need addressing in most cases: 

1  The application of ALARP can only be to risks which the licensee controls (e.g. it is 
not  a  requirement  for  nuclear  power  plant  operators  to  consider  other  forms  of 
electrical generation).  

2  Affordability, i.e. whether a company is in a position to fund improvements, is not a 
legitimate  factor  in  the  ALARP  argument,  though  the  cost  of  implementing  the 
improvement is. 

3  ALARP cannot be used to argue against fulfilling statutory duties. 

4  The ALARP argument needs to consider all the types of risk that are relevant, not 
just  the  nuclear  /  radiological  ones,  and  where  these  conflict  with  one  another, 
ensure  that  an  appropriate  overall  balance  is  achieved  in  regard  to  their 
management. 

5  ALARP  demonstrations  ought  to  consider  all  the  various  options  which  could 
realistically  improve  safety,  and  then  implement  the  option  or  combination  of 
options which achieves the lowest level of residual risk provided this is reasonably 
practicable (para 50 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3]). It is not adequate to start with 
the cheapest option first.  

Similarly,  inspectors  should  be  alert  to  disproportionate  consideration  of  ‘deluxe’ 
options  that  involve  excessive  cost  being  used  to  argue  that  there  are  no 
reasonably practicable improvements. The timescale for implementation may be a 
factor in the choice of the ALARP option, so due consideration should be given to 
less effective options that might be implemented with shorter lead times, especially 
where the risks are high or the resultant hazard reduction is significant.  

In  more  complex  situations,  licensees  will  have  to  select  an  option  taking 
cognisance  of  all  relevant  legislation  such  as  safety,  environmental  and  security. 
Section 6.6.4 provides guidance on developing an optimised solution where there 
are both safety and environmental duties to be met.  

6  Existing  facilities  should  be  compared  against  relevant  modern  standards, 
including  those  not  in  force  when  they  were  designed  /  constructed.  The  safety 
case  should  consider  the  importance  of  any  shortfalls  and  what  options  exist  for 
improvement,  again  starting  with  the  safest,  and  then  consider  the  reasonable 
practicability  of  implementing  them.  Older  facilities  may  meet  the  ALARP 
requirement  at  higher  risks  than  new  ones  (para  52  of  the  HSE  ALARP  Principles 
[3]). 

7  The  ALARP  case  should  be  fit  for  purpose.  If  the  risks  are  high  then  the 
demonstration of ALARP needs to be more rigorous than if the risks are low. The 
degree  of  rigour  should  also  depend  on  the  consequence  level.  For  higher 
consequence  situations  the  consequences  should  weigh  more  heavily  than  the 
frequency  estimates.  Furthermore,  thought  should  be  given  to  the  robustness  of 
the conclusions with respect to uncertainties and to any assumptions employed in 
the demonstration. 

8 

If  the  ALARP  demonstration  employs  a  comparison  of  costs  and  risk  reduction 
benefits  to  rule  out  an  improvement,  then  based  on  our  current  guidance  [3],  it 
must  be  shown  that  the  costs  (sacrifice)  of  the  improvement  would  be  "grossly 
disproportionate"  (see  Cost  Benefit  Analysis  Principles  [7]).  The  law  does  not 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 7 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

recognise an acceptable region other than when ALARP has been met so there is 
unlikely to be any sympathy in the courts for parity of costs and benefits, even at 
the TOR Broadly Acceptable level. Advice from HSE lawyers is that, provided the 
risk is more than fanciful, the courts would still seek "gross disproportion". It is also 
true  that,  depending  on  circumstances,  future  health  and  safety  court  cases  may 
lead  to  a  change  in  interpretation  of  SFAIRP  and  subsequently  HSE  and  ONR 
guidance  on  this  matter.  However  until  such  time  we  will  continue  to  follow  our 
existing guidance. 

i)  There  is  however,  no  precise  legal  factor  or  HSE  algorithm  for  gross 
disproportion.  For  the  purposes  of  this  TAG,  it  is  suggested  that  the 
evidence  given  by  John  Locke,  then  Director  General  of  HSE,  at  the 
Sizewell  B  Public  Inquiry  provides  a  starting  point.  Although  this  evidence 
was  produced  some  time  ago,  no  subsequent  legal  proceedings  or  public 
inquiries  have  countered  these  views  or  provided  alternatives.  In  his 
evidence,  Locke  suggested  a  gross  disproportion  factor  of  up  to  3  for 
workers. For risks to the public, he added that the factor would depend on 
the level of risk, and where the risks were low (consequence and likelihood) 
a  factor  of  about  2  was  suggested,  whereas  for  higher  risks  the  factor 
should be about 10. 

ii)  The Health Protection Agency (HPA, now Public Health England) produced 
guidance  relating  to  the  dose  saved  resulting  from  routine  exposure  or 
minor  accidents  i.e.  stochastic  effects,  up  to  about  100  mSv.  This 
recommends  that  an  increasing  multiplier  is  used  as  the  dose  increases 
and  comparison  of  licensees  submissions  with  this  approach  may  be 
valuable as part of our assessments [11]. 

iii) 

In view of these precedents, it is suggested that a factor of less than 10 in 
the vicinity of a BSL is unlikely to be acceptable and, for hazards that can 
cause large consequences, the factor may need to be larger still. 

 

6. 

6.1 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – DETAILED REQUIREMENTS 

Relevant Good Practice 

ALARP demonstrations should consider first and foremost factors relating to 
engineering, operations and the management of safety. These expectations are often 
referred to by the general term "relevant good practice".  Based on HSE [4], relevant 
good practice is "… those standards for controlling risk which have been judged and 
recognised by HSE as satisfying the law when applied to a particular relevant case in 
an appropriate manner." In nuclear safety applications, where the potential 
consequences of accidents can be very serious, the best practice identified as 
appropriate to the application would normally be required for new designs. Annex 2 
contains further guidance on the application of ALARP for new civil nuclear reactors in 
the context of Generic Design Assessment [20]. Annex 3 contains responses to a 
number of RGP frequently asked questions.  

6.2 

For an existing facility, relevant good practice is established by using the standards 
that would be applied to a new design as a benchmark and then subjecting any 
shortfalls to the test of reasonable practicability. Unless the sacrifice entailed in moving 
towards the benchmark is grossly disproportionate to the safety benefit, the licensee 
should make that move. 

6.3  What is accepted as relevant good practice may change over time because of 
technological innovation which improves the degree of control, cost impact of 
improvements or knowledge about the hazard. For existing facilities in Periodic Safety 
Reviews (PSRs), the facility should be compared with the benchmark of modern 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 8 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

6.7 

standards (see T/AST/050 [23] on PSRs for more information). Due account should 
then be taken when considering compliance and the reasonable practicability of 
improvements, of aspects such as the age of the facility, its future lifetime, future 
operations and the degree and importance of any shortfall. 

In terms of specific sources of relevant good practice for the nuclear industry there are 
several legal requirements which must be met and in some cases ACoPs (Approved 
Codes of Practice) and Guidance have been issued (e.g. the ACoP to the IRRs [12]) to 
assist the licensee in achieving compliance. 

Standards exist for many engineering and operational features and it is a feature of 
new designs that licensee proposals may be based on non-UK standards. Such 
standards should be subject to assessment to ensure they represent appropriate 
relevant good practice in a UK context. There are also several international bodies 
which produce standards or guidance documents: where the UK is tied by international 
agreements, e.g. EU, the standards have the same status as UK ones; where such 
agreements do not exist, the guidance may be considered as authoritative, but 
subsidiary to UK requirements.  In a nuclear context, IAEA Safety Standards and the 
Safety Reference Levels developed by WENRA for reactors, decommissioning, and 
the storage of radioactive waste and spent fuel [21] should be considered to be 
relevant good practice. 

ONR inspectors should use the SAPs together with the associated TAGs to judge 
whether licensees' claims for relevant good practice are justified. As the TAGs are 
revised they will be updated in line with the SAPs and will also include explicitly the 
WENRA Reference Levels that are relevant to the TAG in question. Similarly ONR 
guidance on inspection (TIGs) provides the means by which many day-to-day relevant 
good practice decisions are made, e.g. in regard to operational safety.  

Another important source of relevant good practice in the nuclear industry is what is 
done on similar facilities. Many licensees have established their own standards 
reflecting good practice that are acceptable to ONR. However in invoking past practice 
it is important to be clear whether the practice remains relevant and whether it was 
implemented for safety reasons. In reaching a decision to implement measures to 
reduce risks, licensees sometimes take into account additional factors that are not 
directly safety related (e.g. lower insurance premiums, enhanced commercial 
reputation etc). It is important that inspectors do not take such factors into account 
when considering whether licensee precedents represent relevant good practice (see 
para 19 of R2P2

 appendix 3). 

6.8 

In many cases licensees will claim that the implementation of a particular relevant 
good practice or standards is sufficient to demonstrate ALARP. In assessing such 
claims inspectors should apply SAPs ECS.3 to ECS.5 and EQU1 (paras 169 to 177) 
and in particular may consider: 

 

 

the  good  practice  or  standard  should  be  relevant  to  the  specific  application, 
plant, facility or industry in question. 

the  good  practice  or  standard  should  be  up-to-date,  taking  account  of  the 
current state-of-the-art: any practice or standard more than a few years old, or 
not  subject  to  active  ongoing  monitoring  and  review  or  not  written  by 
acknowledged experts may be suspect. 

 

the  good  practice  or  standard  should  not  be  in  the  form  of  a  minimum 
requirement.  

  where  a  good  practice  or  standard  allows  for  more  than  one  option,  these 

should be tested to determine those which are reasonably practicable. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 9 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

the  good  practice  or  standard  should  include  explicitly  all  relevant  factors, 
particularly  relating  to  assumptions  on  the  standards  of  contingent  systems  or 
inputs/outputs.  Standards  and  good  practice  may  relate  to  single  Systems, 
Structures and Components and further consideration may need to be given to 
possible interactions. 

 

there  should  be  no  doubt  about  the  applicability  of  the  good  practice  or 
standard to the case in point. 

 

6.9 

Explicit Comparisons 

Deciding what is reasonably practicable involves the exercise of judgement and 
enforcing authorities will generally expect relevant good practice to be followed. Where 
relevant good practice in particular cases is not clearly established, health and safety 
law effectively requires dutyholders to establish explicitly the significance of the risks to 
determine what action needs to be taken. Where it is not possible to demonstrate 
ALARP by good practice features and risk estimates alone, the benefits of risk 
reducing measures should be compared with their costs. Sometimes it is helpful to use 
a common unit, which is generally money, so that the analysis may become a form of 
Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA). The degree of quantification is case dependent, but must 
be sufficient to make the case fit for purpose. In particular, a CBA is unlikely to be 
considered an adequate argument on its own that a situation is ALARP [14]. The 
following paragraphs give further brief guidance on quantitative approaches, on 
numerical estimation of risks, and on the application of CBA and other quantitative 
approaches. Further guidance to inspectors is provided in HSE's generic Principles for 
CBA [7] the CBA Checklist [9]; HSE's policy in regard to CBA is summarised in 
Appendix 3 of R2P2  [1] and paragraphs 101-108 of its main text. 

Risk Estimation 

6.10  The outline of a quantitative case is relatively straightforward. The benefit requires two 

estimates of risk: one before the implementation of the improvement and one after. 
The safety benefit of the improvement is the incremental difference in risk between the 
two estimates in terms of the detriments (i.e. all the adverse consequences) and their 
likelihoods, summed over the remaining life of the facility. It is anticipated that a broad 
comparison of these benefits and the costs of the improvement can in many cases 
lead to a decision without needing to translate the risk reduction into monetary terms. 
In other cases the detriments may need to be expressed in terms of money to compare 
with the costs of the improvement.  

6.11  The level of risk without the improvement sets the starting point on the risk scale and 

so influences the gross disproportion factor (see para 5.4 (8) and [9]). The selection of 
an appropriate gross disproportion factor will also depend on the robustness of the 
analysis and so should be one of the parameters varied in sensitivity studies.  

6.12  Where a CBA is employed, inspectors should verify that the scope of the CBA is 

sufficient and comprehensive. In particular, there should be a process of systematic 
identification and assessment of benefits and detriments, supported by a suitable 
sensitivity analysis.  

6.13  The use of CBA for comparing the sacrifice from making improvements against the 

safety benefits gained is part of the regulatory process followed during the production 
of new regulations by HSE and other government departments. Less well developed is 
the use of CBA in decision making within the type of goal-setting regulation which ONR 
uses. TOR  [2] Appendix 3 considers the application of CBA to nuclear safety 
assessment and concludes that whilst it may be useful in some circumstances (e.g. 
where quantification can be obtained without disproportionate effort or excessive 
 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 10 of 29 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

uncertainty), it was not feasible, at the time of writing to develop a CBA "rule book" 
approach that can be applied mechanistically. Principles for CBA [7] further 
acknowledges that HSE has no algorithm to determine this factor, which needs to be 
set on a case-by-case basis.  Subsequent regulatory experience (since TOR) suggests 
there would be little benefit in ONR developing such a “rule book” in view of the types 
of safety case arguments we normally see and the overriding need for licensees to 
consider relevant good practice as the starting point for their risk assessments. Cost 
screening can be a useful aid to help decide if more needs to be done; justified risk 
estimates are used together with reasonable accident cost estimates, to provide an 
indication of the amount worth spending to remove the risk. If this amount is low, even 
taking account of potential uncertainties and gross disproportion, compared with the 
cost of any realistic risk reduction measures, then it can be a useful indicator that no 
further risk reduction is needed.   

6.14 

In calculating the accident risk it is important that all the changes in risks due to the 
potential modification are accounted for (see also para 17 of the HSE ALARP Principles 
[3]). It is important to be sure that licensees do not understate the value of the benefit 
from the improvement by limiting the analysis to only the most severe of risks.  
Assessors should therefore check that licensees have not masked potential 
improvements which would affect non-dominant risks by considering only changes to 
the overall risk: all possible risk reductions should be viewed on their own merits. 

6.15  Some quantitative arguments may involve balancing risks, for example implementation 
of  a  modification  to  reduce  risk  to  the  public  might  lead  to  a  dose  uptake  during  the 
work,  and  hence  a  transfer  of  risk.  Although  TOR   [2]  gives  the  tolerable  individual 
risk to a worker as ten times higher than that to the general public, this should not be 
interpreted  to  imply  that  risks  to  different  groups  should  be  valued  differently  for 
ALARP  purposes  (see  paras  37  &  38  of  the  HSE  ALARP  Principles  [3]).  The  issue  of 
balancing  risks  may  also  need  to  involve  cooperation  with  other  agencies  (e.g.  the 
Environment  Agency  &  Scottish  Environment  Protection  Agency  (SEPA))  if  some  of 
the  risks  are  associated  with  authorised  discharges,  protecting  the  environment  or 
disposal of radioactive waste. The Environment Agency employs the concept of “Best 
Available  Techniques”  (BAT)  to  establish  the  appropriate  levels  of  protection  and 
SEPA use “Best Practical Means” BPM. In reality BAT and BPM require dutyholders to 
follow a very similar process of balancing to that used in ALARP determinations. This 
is discussed further in para 6.36.  

Valuation of Detriments 

6.16  Valuation of detriments is still a subject of much discussion and research. HSE uses a 
figure [9] of £1.5million (2009) for the Value of Preventing a statistical Fatality (VPsF). 
In the case of death caused by cancer, HSE has taken the view that people are 
prepared to pay a premium and R2P2 says that a higher figure, twice the above should 
be used. It is suggested here that this premium is also appropriate for all radiation 
deaths. However, continuing research has questioned the validity of applying a 
premium, and so it is possible that the premium may be removed at some future date.  
Noting that in most cases a factor of 2 will not have any material effect on what is / is 
not reasonably practicable given the uncertainties generally prevalent in CBA, this 
aspect will not normally be important.  However, in the unlikely case that including this 
factor is the pivotal aspect in determining whether an improvement reduces risks to 
ALARP, inspectors should seek the advice of the relevant ONR Professional Lead as 
to the current status of the research into this area. 

6.17  Accidental releases of radioactive material may lead to widespread contamination off 
and within the facility or site. Off-site it will lead to other safety-related detriments such 
as evacuation, relocation, land interdiction and food bans. Attempts to cost all of these 
have been made by licensees both for reactors and for chemical plant, based on the 
HPA (now Public Health England) model COCO-1 [15].  An updated model, COCO-2 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 11 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

[16], published in 2008, takes account of the current UK economic structure, considers 
some of the economic effects of an accident in more detail and includes some 
additional sources of loss.  COCO-2 now represents the benchmark when the costing 
of detriments is part of the ALARP demonstration.   

Costs of Implementation 

6.18  A more difficult area for assessment may well be estimating the costs (sacrifice) of the 
modification as these may require a knowledge of both the engineering design and the 
costs of components etc. It is likely that the full engineering details of the modifications 
will not be available so that accurate costings will be difficult.  

6.19 

In considering the sacrifice, it is important that only those costs relating to health and 
safety improvements are included. The costs considered should be only those 
necessary and sufficient for the purpose of reducing the risk and not be for "deluxe" 
measures where cheaper "standard" measures are available. 

6.20  Of all the cost factors, the loss of revenue is particularly problematic as it can lead to a 
paradox: If a plant shutdown is required to implement an improvement, a high revenue 
earning plant may be able to show it is not reasonably practicable to implement an 
improvement which a lower revenue plant would otherwise have implemented. 
Nevertheless ONR accepts that shutdown costs constitute a legitimate part of the 
sacrifice and it is valid to include them. To avoid undue influence of this factor, 
licensees should have considered the phasing of the implementation. For example, it 
may be reasonable to delay implementation until a planned or other outage. 
Furthermore, in some circumstances it may be established relevant good practice to 
shutdown to enable implementation of the improvement, and in such cases these costs 
will have already been implicitly accounted for. Where this is the case, a CBA-based 
argument against implementing established good practice is unlikely to be acceptable. 

6.21  Any discounting of costs and benefits into the future should follow standard Treasury 

rules, with due allowance made for up-rating benefits to take into account predicted 
future improvement in living standards. For further information relating to the 
application of discount rates, inspectors are referred to 'The Treasury Green Book' [18], 
which describes the appraisal and evaluation of Government funded projects. 

6.22  When reviewing proposals to reduce the risks posed by an existing facility, there will 

often be a delay before implementing improvements, for example arising from the need 
to design/manufacture equipment. This raises questions regarding how to take this 
intervening period into account. In such cases, the extent of the original shortfall 
against ALARP should be based on the future life of the facility etc at the time the 
safety case is made, and not the (shorter) remaining life following implementation. 
However, the evaluation of the benefits arising from the improvement may take 
account of the time to implement. In addition, consideration of the risks during the 
period prior to implementation should apply the Time at Risk guidance discussed 
below.  

6.23  The purpose of this part of the TAG is to consider some of the applications of the 

ALARP principle which can lead to contentious situations and/or difficult decisions. 

  

Difficult Areas 

          Uncertainties 

6.24  One of the difficulties in making a robust quantitative argument is that many of the 

factors, both in determining the sacrifice and safety benefits, are subject to sizeable 
uncertainties. Hence in making a case, particularly where it uses quantitative methods, 
sensitivity studies to test the robustness of the arguments should always be provided. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 12 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Paragraphs 89 to 93 of R2P2
precautionary approach in the face of uncertainty, i.e. assume that precautions should 
be taken unless there is a good reason to think that the risk is insignificant (see also 
SAPs para 30). 

 and appendix 1 of R2P2 recommend the use of a 

 

Time at Risk Situations 

6.25  The Numerical Targets set out in SAPs are (mostly) given as frequencies based on 
annual averages. Circumstances will arise where a higher risk will exist for shorter 
periods of time that make the use of annualised frequency targets inappropriate. 

6.26  There are three principal situations in which licensees may argue the acceptability of 

increased risk for a short period to justify not spending resources to improve safety to a 
level that would be reasonably practicable for continuous, long-term operation: 

Through  Life  -  Where  a  short-term  increased  risk  is  needed  for  continued 
normal  operation  of  the  facility.  Examples  here  include  undertaking  certain 
maintenance  activities,  temporary  disconnection  of  safety  measures  to  allow 
completion of essential tasks or other intermittent activities that are required to 
sustain production. 

Residual Facility Life - As a facility ages, its safety margins may be eroded, for 
example due to ageing effects, or its risks may appear high when compared to 
newer  facilities  designed  to  more  modern  standards.  Licensees  may  however 
invoke arguments that these risks are acceptable because the short remaining 
operating life of the facility means that significant investment is unreasonable. 

End  of  Life  Legacy  –  Clean-out  and  decommissioning  may  necessitate  short 
periods  of  increased  levels  of  risk  compared  to  those  from  previous  normal 
operations.  Licensees  may  argue  this  is  unavoidable  if  remediation  of  the 
facility is to be completed. 

 

  Through Life Risk – Specific Considerations 

6.27  The guidance below is intended to provide an overall policy against which to assess 
whether a licensee has made an adequate demonstration that all reasonably 
practicable measures to control any short-term elevated risk have been taken. Due to 
the large number of possible reasons for elevated short-term risk, judging whether 
these requirements have been met for a specific situation however needs to be done 
on a case to case basis: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

SAPs  Principle  NT.2  states  that  there  should  be  sufficient  control  of 
radiological  hazards  at  all  times.  Any  period  in  which  the  risk  is  elevated, 
whatever  the  situation,  must  be  subject  to  a  specific  demonstration  that 
risks  are  controlled  ALARP.  The  period  of  this  elevated  risk  should  be  as 
short as reasonably practicable (SAPs para 762). 

In considering NT.2, the demonstration of  ‘sufficient  control of radiological 
hazards’  should  include  explicit  consideration  of  defence-in-depth  levels 1 
to  4  (SAPs  Principle  EKP.3),  and  the  hierarchy  of  such  measures  (SAPs 
Principle EKP.5).  

The  short-term  risk,  when  annualised,  should  not  exceed  BSLs  except  in 
exceptional  circumstances.  Any  case  made  for  carrying  out  any  operation 
which  requires  the  risk  to  be  in  the  intolerable  region,  however  briefly, 
needs  to  be  made  very  rigorously  to  show  that  nothing  more  can 
reasonably  be  done.    Such  circumstances  should  be  regulated  consistent 
with 
in  SAPs  paras  699-700.  Exceptional 
circumstances  may  include,  for  instance,  situations  not  originally  foreseen 

the  guidance  set  out 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 13 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

4. 

5. 

6. 

in  the  design  of  the  facility.  It  is  expected  that  the  licensee  will  put 
arrangements in place to prevent a recurrence of the unforeseen situation. 

The extent of the time for which the risk is increased should not be the sole 
argument  for  acceptability  that  a  situation  reduces  risks  to  ALARP.  The 
safety  case  should,  drawing  from  appropriate  relevant  good  practice, 
consider  whether  or  not  additional  measures  are  necessary.  As  in  any 
consideration  of  ALARP,  the  magnitude  of  the  potential  consequences 
should also be a factor, as well as the likelihood of the risk being realised. 

During  operations  which  impose  a  planned  short-term  risk,  additional 
monitoring of the actual plant state should be undertaken to ensure that the 
mode  of  operation  and  the  time  during  which  it  persists  meet  the 
assumptions in the ALARP case. 

Unexpected failures of plant and equipment may lead to an increase in risk 
that  is  so  high  that  BSLs  are  exceeded  and  the  risks  thus  judged 
“intolerable” (see TOR  [2]). In such cases the licensee should be actively 
managing and prioritising the situation to reduce the risks  back to ALARP 
as  quickly  as  possible.  It  certainly  should not  be  the  case  that  a  facility  is 
allowed  to  operate  at  this  level  of  risk  unless  there  is  no  alternative  (see 
paras 699-700 of the SAPs). 

 

  Residual Facility Life – Specific Considerations 

6.28  The SAPs (para 35) note that as a facility ages, its safety margins may be eroded, for 
example due to the incidence of, or vulnerability to, faults increasing due to wear etc. 
Reducing the risk level may not be possible, so a judgement then has to be made 
whether the continued operation of the facility is acceptable at the higher risk. The 
future planned lifetime of the facility may be a factor in making such judgements. This 
sort of situation can be difficult where the ageing is gradual and there is no obvious 
transition from 'safe' to 'not safe'. In such cases, careful monitoring and regular review, 
as required of licensees through compliance with their LC15 arrangements (particularly 
short-term reviews – see T/AST/050 [23]), is likely to be needed. 

6.29  The guidance presented here relates to periods that are short in comparison to the 
total design or operational life of the facility. It also relates to assessment of safety 
cases either resulting from a Periodic Safety Review or at any time when a significant 
ageing phenomenon is being considered.  

6.30  The following points should be considered by inspectors in this context: 

i. 

The  safety  case  should  be  updated  promptly  to  take  account  of  any 
relevant  new  knowledge  or  experience  and  data  appropriate  to  the 
current and predicted future state and mode of operation of the facility. 
Comparison  with  modern  standards  of  engineering  and  operation  and 
risk criteria should be undertaken. 

ii.  The  revised  risk  assessment  must  show  that  the  facility  is  tolerable  for 
future  operations.  For  example  the  numerical  risk  estimates  should  not 
be  greater  than  BSLs.  If  the  risk  is  deemed  to  be  intolerable  then  the 
guidance in SAPs paras 699-700 should be followed. 

iii.  Proposed  limits  on  remaining  lifetime  may  be  invoked  in  making  the 
ALARP  demonstration,  but  this  cannot  be  used  to  justify  a  facility 
operating in the intolerable region. A case not to make an improvement 
based largely on limited future lifetime would only be acceptable where 
the maximum extent of the future operational life is irrevocably fixed. In 
cases  where  the  planned  lifetime  is  not  irrevocably  fixed,  a  minimum 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 14 of 29 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

period  of  ten  years  (or  the  unavoidable  necessary  life  of  the  facility,  if 
longer)  should  be  considered 
the  ALARP 
for 
demonstration (see SAPs para 35). 

the  purposes  of 

  End of Life Legacy – Specific Considerations 

6.31  There may be situations, particularly during cleanout and decommissioning, where the 
risks need to be increased temporarily so that the long-term risks can then be reduced 
or eliminated (SAPs paras 759-767). Such increased risks need to be balanced against 
the continuing risks from doing nothing and with due consideration of the alternatives 
available to address the hazard. Cases arguing for extensive delays to hazard 
reduction by invoking CBA with significantly discounted future costs need to be 
guarded against. Concentration on removal of the hazard, or on decreasing its 
propensity to cause harm should instead be paramount. Arguments based simply on 
time at risk will not generally be sufficient. 

6.32  During the course of hazard reduction, which may be for a significant time, it is 

expected that suitable engineering and/or operational arrangements will be made to 
minimise, so far as is reasonably practicable, both the magnitude and time of the 
higher risk, balancing e.g. operational doses and the potential for accidental releases.  
Further details on these aspects are addressed in T/AST/026 on Decommissioning). 

  Arguments for allowing an increase in risk 

6.33  Licensees may argue that moving to a less protected situation meets the ALARP 

criteria e.g. by suggesting that increases in risk are more than balanced by the gains in 
reduced operational costs or increased operating profit. Other factors, particularly 
those relating to good practice and previous experience, would militate against this 
argument and, in general, ONR would require previous good practice to be upheld.  

6.34  To succeed in an approach where risks appear to increase, the licensee would have to 
show “changed circumstances”, as noted in para 39 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3], or 
that the existing situation went well beyond what was required by ALARP. In addition, 
any case for reducing safety would also have to show that additional safety measures 
are not reasonably practicable in the new situation. However, where the level of risk is 
low, and the increase in risk is small and forms part of a package which overall 
improves health and safety, the licensee’s proposals should be considered in this 
wider context.  

6.35  Other grounds which may be acceptable are where the risks are low and the measures 
in place can be shown to be unduly conservative as a result of new knowledge. In 
other cases a change may be forced due to it being impossible to replace like-for-like 
components due to obsolescence. Another possibility is where the safety case 
contains generous margins which can be relaxed without any diminution in the 
required level of safety. Many people feel uncomfortable about accepting increased 
risks, which is often referred to as "reverse" or "negative" ALARP, but in the past ONR 
has accepted cases which meet the above criteria and HSE's ALARP principles (para 
39 of the HSE ALARP Principles) anticipate the need to deal with such situations. 

  Regulatory Application of ALARP and BAT/BPM 

6.36  Another area where an increase in risks (on and/or off-site) can occur is where 

additional measures need to be taken on the site to reduce the quantity of radioactive 
material permitted to be discharged to the environment in normal operations. This 
usually results from activities regulated by the Environment Agency and SEPA to 
reduce discharges to comply with Best Available Techniques (BAT) (or Best Practical 
Means (BPM) in Scotland). Possible consequences of these additional measures are 
that on-site accumulation of radioactive waste will increase (unless a disposal route 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 15 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

exists), or safety risks to workers will rise (e.g. from implementing and/or operating the 
new measures).   

6.37  Concerns were historically expressed by the nuclear industry that different regulatory 
application of ALARP and BAT in nuclear safety and environmental protection gave a 
propensity for conflict. This was a factor that prompted a review of the working 
relationship between HSE and EA in respect to nuclear sites and development of a 
Statement of Intent between HSE and EA in 2001. A separate Statement of Intent was 
also developed for HSE interactions with SEPA.  

6.38  Given the different terminology used in different legislation and the requirement for 

licensees to meet all their duties, the term “optimisation” is used in T/AST/026 
‘Decommissioning Technical Assessment Guide’ to refer to the level of protection that 
meets all the legal requirements of ALARP, BAT, BPM etc. Optimisation is also the 
term used in the IAEA Safety Fundamentals [17] where Principle 5 states “Protection 
must be optimised to provide the highest level of safety that can reasonably be 
achieved.” 

6.39  Consequently it is important that, during optioneering studies carried out by the 

licensee to establish the BAT or BPM option, adequate weighting is given to health and 
safety aspects so that an overall ALARP solution that balances health, safety and 
environmental aspects is reached in an optimised manner. Such a balance should 
consider: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The  number  of  people  (workers  and  the  public)  who  may  be 
exposed to radiation; 

The likelihood of their incurring exposures; 

The magnitude and distribution of radiation doses received; 

Radiation risks arising from foreseeable events; 

Economic, social and environmental factors. 

Using good practices and common sense to avoid radiation risks as 
far as is practical in day to day activities. 

6.40  More guidance on how to achieve ALARP in a decommissioning context is set out in 

T/AST/026. 

  Risk Trade-offs 

6.41 

If a change to the design or operation of a facility is implemented to reduce a particular 
risk, it is highly likely that there will be other effects which could alter the risk profile of 
the facility. Paras 36 to 38 of HSE's ALARP Principles [3] refers to this as Risk Transfer 
and confirm the importance of considering all of the risks within the licensee's control 
as part of a balanced decision on how to reduce overall risks to ALARP (see also para 
26(d)). It has already been emphasised that the full effect of the implementation needs 
to be considered in terms of the reduction in risks, but it should be borne in mind that 
risks may also be increased in other areas. For example, risks from radiological 
hazards may be from accident or normal operational risks; these could affect the public 
and/or persons on-site; there may be conventional (non-radiological) risks arising from 
the changes. It is important therefore, when considering implementation of a 
modification, to consider whether the licensee has analysed all relevant types of risk 
and that any increase in risk in other areas is not greater than the decrease in the area 
being analysed.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 16 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

  Dose/Risk Sharing 

6.42 

 When considering doses that are received in normal operation, a certain degree of 
dose sharing is acceptable to reduce doses to individual workers and hence their risks. 
The IRR ACoP [12] says that if a choice between restricting doses to individuals and 
groups has to be made, priority should be given to keeping individual doses as far 
below dose limits as reasonably practicable. Dose sharing might reduce individual 
doses further but should not be used as a primary means of complying with dose 
limits. Priority should instead be given to changing methods of work, improving 
engineering controls and adopting other means of restricting exposure. In the case of 
doses received due to accidental releases, the concept of risk sharing for workers by 
use of occupancy factors may be questionable; individual risk cannot be made 
acceptable by using many people for short periods so each only gets a small portion of 
the total risk.  

  Occupancy Factors 

6.43 

In the analysis of an individual fault scenario, the risks and protection measures should 
be assessed with respect to the potential dose to a worker who is exposed to the 
consequences of identified faults/events. The likelihood of a particular fault/event 
should not be judged acceptable on one facility, and not on another, merely because 
there are more people working within the first facility to "share" the risk. When 
summing risks to an individual worker on a facility from all faults (e.g. for comparison 
against SAPs Target 5), it is acceptable to consider justified "occupancy" factors as not 
all persons on-site will be exposed to all the risks from the facility.   

6.44  Occupancy claims need to be considered carefully as the occupancy under 

consideration can mean different things: 

 

 

 

the  fraction  of  time  a  specific  individual  is  on-site.  If  the  risk  being 
estimated is to a specific individual this factor is valid. 

the  fraction  of  risks  on  a  particular  facility  or  site  that  a  specific 
individual may be exposed to. Again if calculating specific individual risk 
is the aim, including this factor is valid. 

the likelihood of a worker being in the vicinity of an accident. Where a 
worker  may  be  present  for  part  of  the  time  and  the  fault  is  random, 
there  are  two  situations  to  consider:  in  assessing  the  risk  in  cases 
where the occupancy is controlled it is valid to consider the occupancy 
factor, but  where the occupancy is uncontrolled (e.g. in a  corridor) the 
dose should be assessed assuming a person is present. 

 In considering SAPs Target 6, which addresses doses from single accidents on site, it 
is expected that estimates will be made assuming someone is present unless 
adequate control measures are in force to ensure their absence (see SAPs Annex 2). 
Should the summed risk to any worker be high however, then justified occupancy 
claims can be considered, along with any proposals to control exposure etc. 

6.45 

 

Long-Term Risk Assessment 

6.46  There is a growing perception that risks that are imposed, that are unevenly 

distributed, or that affect future generations should be scrutinised and seen to be 
justified (R2P2
particularly those associated with radioactive waste management and 
decommissioning, run over many years, and the risks that result may affect future 
generations of workers and the public as well as the present generation. For such 

, paras 47 & 48). Some projects in the nuclear industry, and 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 17 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

cases the risks should be assessed in a holistic manner and not restricted to part of 
the overall time period or part of a process.  

6.47 

In general, we should seek to protect future generations at least as well as we seek to 
protect the present one. Although it could be argued that the next few generations may 
gain some indirect benefit, the uncertainty of how they will view the risks left to them 
(and indeed the uncertainty of any benefits further into the future) argues for a 
precautionary approach  (R2P2
demonstration that risks are indeed ALARP. We would therefore expect to see 
particular efforts made to demonstrate that risks to future generations are at least 
consistent with the levels of risk that would be accepted as adequate protection for the 
present generation.  

, paras 89-93) and hence a particularly stringent 

6.48  Given the uncertainties in estimating long-term future risks, good practice and the 

application of the Engineering Key Principles hierarchy with the emphasis on control of 
hazard (see SAPs EKP 1-4) are likely to be much more important than numerical risk 
estimates and CBA in establishing the way forward. In this context it is worth bearing in 
mind that a 1x10 -4/ yr risk for one year implies a low likelihood of someone being hurt, 
whereas 1x10 -4/ yr for 10000 years implies a high likelihood of an adverse 
consequence. 

  SFAIRP and the Requirement for Risk Assessment 

6.49  The requirement to carry out a risk assessment and produce a safety case is absolute 

and cannot be argued against on the grounds that the costs are grossly 
disproportionate to the risks (see para 26c). Instead, the scope, depth and effort put 
into the risk assessment / safety case should be proportionate to the level of risk and 
hazard. 

7. 

ALARP AND REGULATORY DECISIONS 

7.1 

Licensees may need to conduct their undertakings in a given way in order to secure 
certain societal or public interest benefits such as activities in “the interests of national 
security” or “keeping the lights on”, or because “the priorities for a fixed national 
(government) budget lie elsewhere”.  Claims related to such “Strategic Imperatives” 
can sometimes appear in safety cases in the context of “time”, or “trouble” aspects, on 
the sacrifice side of the ALARP balance.  Inspectors should however, make their 
judgements on whether the legal duty to reduce risks to ALARP has been met 
independently of such considerations, as these normally lie beyond the scope of 
HSWA.  Instead these Strategic Imperatives will normally be a factor informing ONR’s 
enforcement decisions.  For instance, if risks have not been reduced to ALARP, 
relevant Strategic Imperatives can and should be taken into account by those with 
delegated authority when determining proportionate enforcement action, or in 
decisions whether to grant a permission. Guidance on what to do when dealing with 
Strategic Imperatives is provided in the following two sections.  

Enforcement Decisions 

7.2 

Enforcement decisions within ONR are made in accordance with the ONR’s 
Enforcement Policy Statement [22], which sets out the principles, purpose and methods 
of enforcement.  A spectrum of enforcement options is available depending on the 
circumstances.  These range from providing verbal or written advice, delaying or 
refusing to grant a permission for a given activity, issuing Improvement or Prohibition 
Notices, through to prosecution in the most serious cases.  Reflecting this, HSE has 
developed the Enforcement Management Model (EMM) to guide regulators in making 
consistent and proportionate enforcement decisions.   

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 18 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

7.3 

ONR guidance on applying the EPS within the framework of the Nuclear Licencing 
regime is provided in “The Enforcement Management Model in ONR”, NS-ENF-GD-002  
[19].  In applying the EMM to ALARP decisions, inspectors should establish the 
seriousness of shortfalls with reference to the risk gap (i.e. between where the licensee 
is and where they ought to be when complying with the law).  This should then be used 
to inform ONR’s decision on appropriate enforcement action.  It is at this point in the 
EMM process that Duty holder and Strategic Factors should be taken in to account, 
and not when determining legal compliance.  

Permissioning Decisions 

Similarly, where the licensee’s ALARP justification is part of a request to grant a 
permission required under a nuclear site Licence Condition, ONR inspectors should 
distinguish between wider arguments related to Duty holder and Strategic Factors and 
the judgement as to whether risks are reduced to ALARP.  Ultimately, consideration of 
an ALARP shortfall in the context of these wider factors may lead ONR to nonetheless 
grant permission for the activity, e.g. where it is deemed in the public interest to do so.  
The supporting audit trail (i.e. the Project Assessment Report, PAR) for such Licence 
Instruments should clearly define the rationale for the decisions made, and detail why 
the permission has been granted, despite the evident shortfall(s) in demonstrating 
ALARP. 

 It must also be recognised that, in accordance with ONR’s regulatory philosophy and 
irrespective of any claims of Strategic  Factors, there may be situations where the 
licensee has not adequately demonstrated that risks have been reduced to ALARP, 
but where the gap is such that it would be disproportionate not to grant a permission.  
In these cases, inspectors should work with the licensee to bring the situation back into 
legal compliance, but this process should not (depending on the EMM) necessarily 
mean that our permission is withheld. 

ONR’s published guide to risk informed regulatory decision making [28] gives further 
information on the factors involved in decision making and notes that “There can also 
be other wider factors (beyond dutyholder and strategic factors), such as ‘in the 
interests of national security’, that we term strategic imperatives, where we do not have 
the authority or sufficient knowledge of the considerations involved to judge the 
significance of such factors. Strategic imperatives would not normally change our 
regulatory decision, but may require a different course of action. In such 
circumstances, we would work collaboratively with the dutyholder to ensure the best 
safety outcome within the constraints of the imperative, but also to ensure that all 
relevant stakeholders understand the implication of the chosen course of action. Such 
circumstances have been, and are likely to remain, extremely rare.”  

 

8. 

CHECKLIST 

Attached at Annex 1 is a checklist of the main assessment points which will help 
inspectors decide whether all the key points have been addressed by the licensee in 
its ALARP assessment. 

 

7.4 

7.5 

7.6 

8.1 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 19 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

9. 

REFERENCES 

1.  Reducing risks protecting people. HSE Books 2001

 

2.  HSE. The Tolerability of Risk from Nuclear Power Stations, HMSO, 1992.

 

3.  Principles  and  guidelines  to  assist  HSE  in  its  judgements  that  dutyholders  have  reduced 

risk as low as reasonably practicable.  

4.  Assessing compliance with the law in individual cases and the use of good practice. 

5.  Policy and Guidance on reducing risks as low as reasonably practicable in design. 

6.  The Regulation of Nuclear Installations in the UK including Notes for Applicants.

 

7.  Principles for Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) in support of ALARP decision. 

8.  ALARP "at a glance". 

9.  Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) Checklist. 

10. ONR. Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities. 2014. 

11. NRPB - Documents of the NRPB vol. 4(2) 1993 

12. HSE. Work with Ionising Radiation, Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017, Approved 

Code of Practice and Guidance,  ISBN 978071766621  

13. Not Used. 

14. Harbison,  S.  A  Safety  Assessment  and  Objectives  for  Plant  Designed  40  Years 

Ago, Paper presented at ENS Conference, TOPSAFE 95, Budapest 

15. Haywood  S  M  et  al  COCO-1:  Model  for  Assessing  the  Costs  of  Offsite 

Consequences of Accidental Releases of Radioactivity, NRPB-R243, 1991 

16. COCO-2: A model to Assess the Economic Impact of an Accident, HPA-RPD-046, 2008 

17. IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles: Safety Fundamentals no. SF-1. IAEA Vienna 

2006 http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1273_web.pdf  

18. HM Treasury Green Book. 

therein to the EMM. 

19. Guidance on the use of the Enforcement Management Model NS-ENF-GD-002 See links 

20. Nuclear power station generic design assessment – guidance to requesting parties HSE   

21. Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association – WENRA  

22. ONR’s Enforcement Policy Statement 

23. T/AST/050 - ND Technical Assessment Guide on Periodic Safety Reviews 

24. Not used 

Nuclear safety Cases  

25. T/AST/051  -  ND  Technical  Assessment  Guide  on  the  purpose,  scope  and  content  of 

26. WENRA  statement  on  safety  objectives  for  new  nuclear  power  plants  2010.  
http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2012/11/05/wenra_statementonsafetyobje
ctivesfornewnuclearpowerplants_nov2010.pdf 

27. WENRA guidance on “Timely Implementation of Reasonably Practicable Safety 

Improvements to existing Nuclear power plants”. 2017.  
http://www.wenra.org/archives/wenra-guidance-article-8a-nuclear-safety-directive/ 

28. ONR, Risk informed regulatory decision making, 2017, 

www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/risk-informed-regulatory-decision-making.pdf. 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

 
 

Page 20 of 29 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

10. 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

ACoP 
ALARP 
BSL 
BSL(LL) 
BSO 

CBA 
 
EA 
HPA 
HSE 

HSAW 
IAEA 
IRR 
NDA 
NIA 
PSA 
PSR 
R2P2 
SAP 

Approved Code of Practice 
As Low As Reasonably Practicable 
Basic Safety Level 
Basic Safety Level (legal limit) 
Basic Safety Objective 

Cost Benefit Analysis 

Environment Agency 
Health Protection Agency 
Health and Safety Executive 

The Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017 
Nuclear Decommissioning Authority 
Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) 
Probabilistic Safety Analysis 
Periodic Safety Review 
Reducing Risk Protecting People 
Safety Assessment Principle(s)  

SFAIRP 
SEPA 
TAG 
TOR 
WENRA 

So Far As Is Reasonably Practicable 
Scottish Environment Protection Agency 
Technical Assessment Guide(s) 
Tolerability of Risk 
Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association 

  
 
 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 21 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

11. 

APPENDICES 

Annex 1 - ALARP Checklist 

A1.1  The risks must be ALARP. If the engineering and operation of the facility gives 
no  cause  for  concern,  and  the  risks  are  adequately  demonstrated  to  be  "broadly 
acceptable"  (i.e.  below  all  the  BSOs)  then  this  is  sufficient  for  ONR  assessment 
purposes.  If  the  risks  are  above  a  BSO,  then  inspectors  should  consider  specifically 
whether these are reduced to ALARP. 

A1.2  If the risks exceed a BSL or fall significantly short of an accepted relevant good 
practice,  e.g.  evidently  poor  engineering  or  sub-standard  operations  (procedures  or 
implementation) then inspectors need to follow the advice set out in SAPs paras 699-
700.  This  includes  consideration  of  whether  the  facility  should  be  shutdown  or  the 
activity curtailed. 

A1.3  The following checkpoints may be relevant in reviewing licensees' safety cases 
or arguments that the risks are ALARP: 

1.  Is there evidence of an adequate and fit-for-purpose evaluation of risks that underpins 

2.  Does the ALARP argument refer only to those risks which the licensee controls (para 

the ALARP case (para 5.3) 

5.4(1)) 

3.  Affordability is not a legitimate factor in the assessment of costs (para 5.4(2)) 

4.  ALARP cannot be used to argue against statutory duties (para 5.4(3)) 

5.  Does  the  ALARP  argument  take  adequate  account  of  all  types  of  risks,  including 

conventional (i.e. non-radiological) risks (para 5.4(4)) 

6.  Have  all  relevant  options  been  considered  by  the  licensee  and  does  the  licensee's 
study  of  the  options  begin  with  the  safest  (as  opposed  to  the  cheapest)  option  para 
5.4(5)) 

7.  If measures are deemed not reasonably practicable, has partial implementation been 
considered? Inspectors need also to be wary of "deluxe" measures unduly inflating the 
cost para 5.4(5)) 

8.  Is the rigour of ALARP case made commensurate with the level of risk in the scenario 

9.  For  measures  deemed  not  reasonably  practicable,  has  the  licensee  demonstrated 

under consideration (para 5.4(7)) 

gross disproportion (para 5.4(8)) 

10. The  ALARP  arguments  should  include  explicit  consideration  of  qualitative  features 
related to engineering and other types of relevant good practice (para 6.1 – 6.49). 

11. The  ALARP  argument  should  be  based  on  comparisons  with  relevant  good  practice, 
informed as necessary by CBA (para 6.13), rather than the other way around. A CBA 
on its own is not acceptable as an ALARP case.  

12. Are  all  of  the  relevant  engineering  SAPs  met?  If  not,  has  the  licensee  identified  and 

considered any deficiencies from an ALARP perspective (para 6.8) 

13. ALARP applies at all times and arguments employing Time at Risk may need special 

consideration (para 6.24 – 6.31). 

14. Reverse  ALARP  arguments  for  increased  risk  are  only  allowable  in  ‘changed 
circumstances’  or  where  the  licensee  can  show  that  the  existing  situation  goes  well 
beyond what is required by ALARP (para 6.35).  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 22 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

15. Dose  sharing:  Has  the  licensee  given  adequate  consideration  to  changing  working 
methods,  engineering  controls  or  other  means  of  dose  restriction  before  proposing 
dose sharing (para 6.42) 

16. Have occupancy factors in assessments of worker risk been properly considered (para 

6.43) 

17. Have safety and environmental factors been considered in an optimised manner during 
optioneering  studies  in  order  to  meet  all  legislative  requirements  of  ALARP  and  BAT 
(para 6.36 – 6.39)  

18. Have strategic imperatives been used as justification for the activity where risks are not 

actually reduced ALARP (para 7.1)    

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 23 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

Annex 2 – ALARP for proposed new civil nuclear reactors 

A2.1    In  the  context  of  the  Generic  Design  Assessment  (GDA)  process  for  new  reactor 
designs ONR has to judge whether the legal duty of controlling and reducing risks so far 
as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP), usually referred to within HSE as ALARP (as low 
as reasonably practicable), will be met.   In contrast to the majority of cases we normally 
deal  with  at  existing  licensed  sites,  the  ALARP  arguments  presented  for  GDA  will  not 
relate to whether additional features should be implemented to an existing design, but will 
instead involve consideration of the facility’s design as a whole.  Thus the position when a 
new reactor design is presented to us goes beyond the situations considered in other HSE 
ALARP guidance.   

A2.2  Although nominally at the design stage, all of the proposed designs are essentially 
complete in terms of the overall concept and major systems, and have reached that stage 
after  many  years  of  development  and  optimisation  in  non-UK  regulatory  environments. 
However,  the  essence  of  the  UK  system  is  goal-setting  and  the  main  objective  is  to  see 
whether  the  reactor  designs  represent  an  ALARP  outcome  rather  than  to  examine  the 
route  by  which  that  end  was  achieved.  Similarly,  ONR  needs  to  look  at  the  design 
holistically and be guided by overall safety rather than focussing on incremental changes 
(e.g.  the  thickness  of  a  concrete  wall,  or  level  of  redundancy  in  a  single  system)  to 
individual elements of the safety argument in isolation. Hence the intention is not to seek 
new, UK-specific design features, but to see that the law is met. Furthermore we recognise 
there  are  safety  benefits  in  standardisation:  a  wider  pool  of  experience  will  inevitably 
provide  better  feedback  for  future  improvement  in  safety  and  this  must  be  taken  into 
account.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that  the  intent  is  to  judge  whether  the  individual  designs 
meet the requirement to demonstrate ALARP on their own merits, not to compare them.  

A2.3  For the overall ALARP demonstrations we expect the four main areas below to be 
addressed: 

1    There  is  a  clear  conclusion  that  there  are  no  further  reasonable  practicable 
improvements that could be implemented, and therefore the risk has been reduced to 
ALARP. 

2    Relevant  Good  Practice:  This  is  the  basic  requirement  for  demonstrating  that 
designs  meet  the  law.  The  Requesting  Party  (RP)  must  set  out  the  standards  and 
codes  used  and  justify  them  to  the  extent  that  we  can  ‘deem’  them  relevant  good 
practice  when  viewed  against  our  SAPs.  This  justification  is  expected  to  include  a 
comparison  with  other  international/  national  standards.  Clearly  the  standards  and 
codes adopted by the RP must be shown to have been met. 

3  Options: This will comprise two stages: Firstly an examination of the RP’s rationale 
for  the  evolution  of  the  design,  using  its  forerunners  as  a  baseline,  looking  at  why 
certain features were selected and others rejected and how this process has resulted 
in an improved design from a safety perspective.  Secondly the RP needs to address 
the question “what more could be done?” and provide an argument of “why they can’t 
do it” (i.e. why it is not reasonably practicable).  This second element could be done by 
postulating  further  options  for  improvement  (previously  discarded  options  may  be 
suitable  candidates)  and  evaluating  them.  Clearly  if  an  option  is  shown  to  be 
reasonably  practicable  then  that  option  should  have  been  taken,  or  where  it  is  found 
not  to  be  excessively  expensive  to  improve  safety,  then  further  avenues  for  risk 
reduction should be explored.  

4  Risk Assessment: The use of risk targets in isolation is not an acceptable means of 
demonstrating  ALARP  and  we  expect  to  see  risk  assessments  used  to  identify 
potential engineering and/or operational improvements as well as confirming numerical 
levels  of  safety.  The  BSOs  in  the  SAPs  represent  broadly  acceptable  levels  below 
which we have said that we expect to confine ourselves to considering the validity of 
the arguments that the BSOs have actually been met. We have also made it clear that 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 24 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

the way in which we apply these numerical targets will depend heavily on the views we 
form on the engineering (and at a later stage operational practices) and that meeting 
the  BSOs  is  not  a  green  light  for  RPs  to  forego  further  ALARP  considerations. 
Nevertheless, well-supported numerical risk figures that show BSOs to be met can be 
an important element of support to the overall ALARP demonstration 

A2.4    In  support  of  these  four  elements,  ONR  expects  the  following  in  respect  of  new 
commercial reactor designs: 

  The level of safety must be no less than a comparable facility already working or being 

constructed in the UK or somewhere else in the world. 

  As  evolutionary  designs,  which  have  been  designed  taking  account  of  experience  of 
earlier  ones,  the  RP  must  show  how  the  evolution  has  maintained  or  improved  the 
design from a safety perspective. 

  The  demonstration  should  set  out  how  known  problem  areas  (e.g.  identified  from 
Operational Experience Feedback (OEF), improved analysis, or improving standards) 
have been addressed and how and why the particular solution chosen was arrived at. 

  The  Engineering  Key  Principles  (EKP)  1,  2  and  3  of  SAPs  should  be  seen  as  a 
hierarchy  where,  all  else  being  equal,  the  higher  up  the  list  the  better.  Cases  where 
this is not so will need specific justification. 

  Likewise, the hierarchy within EKP 5 should be addressed in a similar manner. 

  There  should  be  clarity  to  the  reasons  for  the  choice  of  design  standards  and 
demonstration that the chosen ones lead to the safest reasonably practicable design. 

  The RP must provide evidence that it has used processes for making design decisions 
in which safety is clearly considered and has been given the appropriate priority. 

  Risk/CBA  type  arguments  on  their  own  must  not  be  allowed  to  override  established 

relevant good practice where this results in degradation in safety. 

A2.5  In addition we might reasonably expect the RP to provide evidence of the following: 

  The RP should show how its process is compatible with UK law; specifically how 
the  comparison  of  sacrifice  and  risk  averted  is  considered  within  the  design 
process and what approach is used for determining “gross disproportion”; 

  Where risk-based CBA-type decision-making has been used, the costings should 
be  appropriate  to  UK  conditions,  gross  disproportion  factors  justified  and 
adequate  sensitivity  studies  should  be  included  to  demonstrate  a  robust 
conclusion; 

  The  design  should  be  considered  holistically  so  that  whilst  individual  systems 
could be improved, the impact on the overall risks makes further improvement not 
reasonably practicable; 

  There is a proper balancing of all risks, worker/public, normal operation/accident, 
radiological/conventional and the procedures used to ensure this should be clear 
and adequate; 

 

 

If any numerical targets for risks are used as cut-offs these must be justified either 
as a whole or in individual applications; 

In particular, where intermediate targets rather than the effects on people and the 
environment are used, the RP should: (a) explain why such a target is used; (b) 
explain  how  it  is  used  during  design  and  optioneering;  (c)  justify  the  specific 
target; and (d) justify the levels of “gross disproportion” used. 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

 
 

Page 25 of 29 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Annex 3 

RGP Common questions and answers 

 

 

 

 

Remind me! – What is ALARP? 

A3.1  ALARP stands for “as low as reasonably practicable” and is used when referring to the 
steps necessary to reduce health and safety risks in order to meet legal duties.  It is the term 
used by ONR, HSE and industry.  For almost all purposes it has the same meaning as “so far 
as is reasonably practicable” (SFAIRP) as used in health and safety legislation.   

A3.2  A  risk  has  been  reduced  ALARP  when  a  dutyholder  can  show  that  further  risk 
reduction  is  not  justified  because  the  sacrifice  associated  with  doing  so  would  be  grossly 
disproportionate in terms of money, time or trouble.  Sections 2 and 3 of the Health and Safety 
at Work etc. Act 1974 require dutyholders to reduce the risks to their employees and to others 
from  their  activities  SFAIRP.    Similar  requirements  are  also  reinforced  in  more  specific 
applications  through  other  health  and  safety  legislation,  such  as  the  Ionising  Radiations 
Regulations 2017. 

A3.3  SFAIRP,  and  by  implication  ALARP,  are  ‘goal-setting’  standards  that  provide  an 
objective against which a dutyholder must select and then justify its approach to achieving it. 

Who judges ALARP? 

A3.4  Ultimately,  whether  a  dutyholder  has  complied  with  its  legal  duty  to  reduce  risks 
ALARP in a particular case may be for a court of law or employment tribunal to decide.   

A3.5  However,  in  regulating  the  industry,  ONR  (and  other  regulators)  effectively  make  the 
required day-to-day judgements, e.g. as part of inspecting and assessing dutyholders against 
their  obligations  and  in  deciding  whether  to  take  enforcement  action.    We  use  a  body  of 
knowledgeable  and  experienced  inspectors,  assisted  by  comprehensive  guidance,  to  make 
these judgements on the basis of the available evidence.  ONR also considers ALARP during 
the  assessment  of  a  licensee’s  safety  case  carried  out  as  part  of  making  a  permissioning 
decision.   

A3.6  Note  that  our  regulatory  decisions  (including  those  relating  to  enforcement  action  or 
the granting of permission) also take into account broader factors in addition to whether or not 
legal standards, including that of ALARP, have been achieved.  This is described in our Risk 
Informed Regulatory Decision Making guidance. 

What is good practice? 

‘Good  practice’  is  a  generic  term  referring  to  a  wide  range  of  control  measures, 

A3.7 
policies, practices and other aspects pertaining to a particular health and safety issue. 

A3.8  Good  practice  can  refer  to  physical  aspects,  including  the  design  of  plant  and 
equipment, the fitting of safety mechanisms, mitigating and emergency measures or to the use 
of  particular  items  of  personal  protective  equipment.    It  can  equally  refer  to  administrative 
control  measures,  including  things  like  training  practices,  maintenance,  inspection,  testing, 
decision-making processes or operating instructions.  It can also refer to fault, hazard or risk 
analysis  methodologies,  strategies,  design  principles,  risk  targets  and  other  approaches  to 
safety analysis, substantiation or design.   

What are the sources of good practice? 

A3.9  While anyone can propose good practice, there is a hierarchy to its significance based 
on its formal status and pedigree, i.e. the weight it might carry in a potential court case:  

 

Approved Codes of Practice (ACoPs) carry the strongest weight and have a 
special legal status.  If a dutyholder complies with the approach to a health and 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 26 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

safety issue set-out in an ACoP, then it is deemed to have complied with the 
law.  A dutyholder may choose to follow a different approach, but then must be 
able to demonstrate why this is equivalent or it will be considered to be below 
minimum legal compliance.  (Note that an ACoP is usually published as a 
single document to go with a set of regulations.  This will provide the ACoP text 
together with accompanying non-statutory guidance.  The accompanying 
guidance does not however carry the special legal status of the ACoP.) 
 
Published regulatory guidance is also a recognised source of good practice.  
For nuclear and conventional safety, our principal sources of good practice are 
the Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) and the additional guidance provided 
in the Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) and Technical Inspection Guides 
(TIGs).   

Other written sources which may be recognised as good practice include 
guidance produced by:  

 
 

 

other government departments; 
national and international standard-setting bodies, e.g. the British 
Standards Institute (BSI), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 
International Standards Organisation (ISO), the European Committee 
for Standardisation (CEN) or Western European Nuclear Regulators’ 
Association (WENRA); 
industry bodies and professional institutes, e.g. the Safety Directors’ 
Forum (SDF), Nuclear Engineering Directors’ Forum (NEDF) or World 
Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO). 

 

There may be unwritten sources of good practice, for example through well-
defined and well-established practices across a particular industrial sector.   

A3.10  The mixing of different standards – ‘pick and mix’ – is discouraged where there is an 
regulatory 
applicable  encompassing  standard,  particularly 
expectations  or  those  from  authoritative  national  and  international  bodies,  such  as  British 
Standards or IAEA Safety Standards.  However, a case can be made in some circumstances 
to draw upon standards from different sources if the situation warrants it.  The important thing 
is  to  consider  the  overall  outcome  against  the  ALARP  requirement.    It  is  also  important  to 
ensure  that  we  do  not  apply  inappropriate  regulatory  pressure  to  ‘gold-plate’  the  solution 
beyond what would be ALARP.  

for  standards  set-out 

in 

What is RGP? 

A3.11  RGP stands for ‘Relevant Good Practice’.  It refers to the body of good practice that is 
specifically  relevant  to  the  situation  and  that  which,  if  implemented,  would  typically  be 
considered to meet the requirement to reduce risks to as ALARP for a particular situation. 

A3.12  The concept of RGP is used because there is usually well-established good practice in 
addressing  a  particular  issue  and  it  is  usually  unnecessary  for  a  dutyholder  to  revert  to  a 
detailed,  first-principles  ALARP  demonstration  in  most  circumstances.    RGP  is  therefore 
helpful in avoiding unnecessary replicated effort where the standard that would be required by 
the courts and the regulator is well-recognised.  This is often true in areas that are common 
across  industry,  including  many  aspects  of  conventional  health  and  safety  and  the  more 
widespread aspects of nuclear and radiological safety.  

A3.13  The  concept  of  RGP  is  less  helpful  for  unique  or  unusual  circumstances  because 
typical  standards  and  practices  are  often  not  fully  relevant  to  the  situation.    In  these  cases 
RGP  is  only  a  starting  point  for  a  more  detailed  demonstration  against  the  fundamental 
ALARP  requirement.    This  is  often  true  for  older  nuclear  facilities  which  fall  short  of  modern 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 27 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

standards  developed  since  they  were  constructed.    This  can  be  exacerbated  by  age-related 
degradation,  making  decommissioning  more  challenging.    Whilst  what  is  RGP  elsewhere 
should still be used as a starting point, the dutyholder may be able to demonstrate an ALARP 
approach that does not meet all aspects of the usual standard in the specific circumstances. 

A3.14  Remember:  for  something  to  be  RGP  it  must  be  ‘relevant’  in  that  it  has  been  read-
across  for  appropriately  similar  circumstances.    It  must  also  represent  ‘good  practice’  rather 
than ‘best practice’ (a practice beyond what the law requires). 

A3.15  Note that ONR also uses the concept of RGP to underpin its judgment of compliance 
against  other  goal-setting  requirements  in  addition  to  those  based  on  ALARP/SFAIRP,  such 
as “suitable and sufficient” and “adequate” as used in the licence conditions.  The remaining 
questions and answers in this document are generally also applicable to these kinds of goal-
setting requirements as well as ALARP. 

What is the legal basis of RGP? 

A3.16  RGP  does  not  have  a  legal  basis  and  is  not  mentioned  in  legislation,  although  a 
regulator’s view on what is considered to be RGP is likely to be persuasive in a court of law. 

A3.17  RGP  is  based  on  regulatory  policy  and  refers  to  the  controls,  standards  and 
approaches  that  meet  the  ALARP  requirement  based  on  what  has  been  accepted  in  similar 
circumstances.    It  is  used  to  avoid  the  need  for  first-principles  ALARP  justifications  being 
required  for  commonly  encountered  circumstances  or  to  provide  a  starting  point  for 
determining the ALARP position in more complex or bespoke situations.  Adherence to RGP is 
not a legal requirement: alternative approaches can be used.  

Who determines RGP? 

A3.18  As part of demonstrating ALARP, a dutyholder will need to consider and judge what it 
considers to be RGP in order to be able to make an argument for the reasonable practicability 
of  the  approach  it  has  taken.    The  arguments  and  evidence  supporting  ALARP  justifications 
should be included within the safety case. 

A3.19  The  regulator  also  needs  to  consider  and  judge  RGP,  based  on  the  sources  listed 
above, to enable regulatory judgments.  In doing so, it is important to bear in mind that RGP is 
only regulatory policy, and represents only an interpretation of what is considered to meet the 
legal requirement based on similar circumstances (although a regulator’s view on what is RGP 
will be persuasive in a court of law). 

Are alternatives to RGP acceptable? 

A3.20  Definitely!    RGP  is  not  the  law:  it  is  a  regulatory  concept  that  provides  a  practical 
mechanism for day-to-day judgments on what would usually be considered to meet the legal 
requirements based on what has been judged and accepted in similar circumstances.  If the 
same  standards  of  safety  can  be  achieved  through  different  means  then  this  also  complies 
with the law.  

Can standards lower than RGP be acceptable? 

A3.21  Yes they can – because it is the overall outcome that matters and lower standards in 
some areas might be justifiable providing the overall result can be shown in the safety case to 
be  ALARP.    However,  it  can  be  challenging  to  argue  for  lower  standards  because  the  RGP 
(providing that it is relevant and constitutes ‘good’ practice) embodies the approach that has 
been previously judged to meet the legal standard in similar circumstances.  

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 28 of 29 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

What are the key things I should consider when making regulatory ALARP judgments? 
A3.22  If  you  are  making  an  assessment  of  an  ALARP  position  you  should  consider  the 
following: 

Remember that the requirement is to reduce risks to be ALARP and this refers 
to the overall outcome rather than seeking to narrowly apply ALARP to each 
individual aspect.   
 
RGP refers to those good practices (be they safety measures, standards, etc.) 
that have been assessed and judged to meet the legal standard in similar 
circumstances and are applicable to the situation at hand.  Only those good 
practices that are both relevant and ‘good’ (as opposed to ‘best practice’ or 
inadequate practice) are RGP:  you must think carefully whether these are 
relevant to the situation and provide good practice (as opposed to inadequate 
practice or best practice).  
 
ALARP in relation to older facilities and in decommissioning requires especially 
careful consideration.  RGP on modern design and operational standards is 
often not fully relevant and it is particularly important to consider the overall 
outcome, including the long-term safety benefits. 
 
Remember that RGP is not mandatory.  It is most applicable to commonly-
encountered circumstances but is only a starting point in situations that do not 
fall within the scope of the circumstances under which the RGP has been 
based.  A dutyholder is free to take an alternative approach providing it can 
demonstrate that it has achieved an ALARP position. 
 
It is important to understand how and why a dutyholder considers its position to 
be ALARP.  You must avoid making premature judgments until you have seen 
a dutyholder’s ALARP case, even when you are confident in the authority of the 
RGP you have identified. 
 
It is important to properly document the sources of any RGP which we have 
identified and to properly record your reasoning, judgement and the application 
of our decision-making due process. 
 
It is important to ensure appropriate cross-discipline working within ONR to 
ensure we make balanced and proportionate judgements. You should seek 
appropriate specialist advice, including the appropriate engineering or human 
factors expectations and fault analysis.  
 
It is important that you make use of the ONR ALARP TAG and the HSE ‘6-
pack’ guidance as appropriate, seeking assistance where necessary – such as 
from the ONR ALARP Working Group. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 
CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 

Page 29 of 29 

 
 

