Organisational Change ns-tast-gd-048.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ONR GUIDE 

Organisational Change   

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 

Date Issued: 

September 2018 

Review Date: 

September 2021 

Approved by: 

Stuart Allen 

Professional Lead – Human and 
Organisational Capability 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 1.1.3.776. (2018/283567) 

Revision commentary: 

Fit for purpose update 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 
1. 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 

STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 3 

5.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 5 

6.  APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2018 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 09/18 
 
 

 

 
 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 25 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) MS.1 to MS.4 which 
apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of the organisational capability 
of potential and existing licensees.  The principles presented in these SAPs are 
supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical 
assessment work in support of making regulatory judgments and decisions.  This 
technical assessment guide is one of those guides. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

The purpose of this Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is to assist in making informed 
judgements and decisions on the adequacy of the licensee’s arrangements and their 
implementation, to ensure that changes to organisational structure or resources which 
may affect safety are adequately controlled in accordance with the requirement of 
nuclear site licence condition (LC) 36 ‘Organisational Capability’ as set out in Appendix  

Appendix 4 of this TAG also provides guidance on how Inspectors should approach 
the revised clause in LC 36(1), added in 2011, which requires licensees to provide and 
maintain adequate financial and human resources to fulfil their obligations in respect of 
nuclear safety.  The revised LC 36(1) was introduced, together with amendments to LC 
17 ‘Management Systems’, to ensure that the Nuclear Safety Directive 
2009/71/Euratom (NSD) is fully implemented in Great Britain.  

It incorporates guidance for inspectors in judging the adequacy with which licensees’ 
arrangements have been implemented, originally presented in T/INS/036 ‘LC36 
Control of Organisational Change’, thus consolidating related guidance within this 
single reference document.  Factors that the inspector may wish to consider 
concerning the way in which a licensee’s arrangements are implemented are set out in 
Appendix 5.   

ONR guidance on assessing arrangements to provide and maintain adequate human 
resources is presented in NS-TAST-GD-065 ‘Function and Content of the Nuclear 
Baseline’. Together, these guides provide comprehensive advice to inspectors on the 
requirements of LC36, as such they should be considered in combination when judging 
the adequacy of a licensee’s arrangements for LC36.  The nuclear industry Safety 
Directors’ Forum (nuclearinst.com/Safety-Directors-Forum) has also published a Good 
Practice Guide (GPG) ‘Nuclear Baseline and the Management of Organisational 
Change – A Good Practice Guide’, with the cooperation of ONR.  This guidance should 
be considered as relevant good practice and inspectors should encourage licensees to 
be familiar with it, and use it, where appropriate.  Where licensees are able to 
demonstrate that their arrangements are consistent with the guidance in the GPG, 
inspectors should regard this as meeting the expectations of this TAG and sufficient for 
compliance with LC 36(2) and LC 36(5). 

1.1 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

 
3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The following UK legal and other requirements are applicable to this TAG: 

3.1 

The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 

 

regulations  describe  employers’ 

These 
the 
requirements  for  control  and  co-operation  with  outside  undertakings,  together 
with  appropriate  arrangements  for  effective  planning,  organisation,  control, 
monitoring and review.  In particular, Regulation 13 requires employers to take 
into  account  employees’  capabilities  as  regards  health  and  safety  when 
entrusting tasks to employees.  

responsibilities,  addressing 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 2 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3.2 

Nuclear Site Licence Conditions  

The following site licence conditions are of particular relevance to this TAG: 

 

 

 

 

 

LC  6  –  Documents,  Records,  Authorities  and  Certificates.  The  licensee 
shall  make  adequate  records  to  demonstrate  compliance  with  any  of  the 
conditions attached to the nuclear site licence.  The licensee’s management of 
change  arrangements  should  include  provision  for  the  identification  and 
management of records arising from implementation of the arrangements. 

LC12  –  Duly  Authorised  and  Other  Suitably  Qualified  and  Experienced 
Persons.  The  licensee  shall  make  and  implement  adequate  arrangements  to 
ensure that only suitably qualified and experienced persons perform any duties 
which  may  affect  the  safety  of  operations  on  the  site.    Persons  fulfilling 
management  of  organisational  change  roles,  as  roles  which  may  affect  the 
safety  of  operations,  must  be  suitably  qualified  and  experienced  to  fulfil  those 
roles. 

LC  17  –  Management  Systems.  The  licensee  shall  establish  and  implement 
adequate  quality  management  arrangements  in  respect  of  all  matters  which 
may affect safety. Management of change arrangements should be an integral 
part of the licensee’s management system. 

LC  26  –  Control  and  Supervision  of  Operations.  The  licensee  shall  ensure 
that  no  operations  are  carried  out  which  may  affect  safety  except  under  the 
control and supervision of suitably qualified and experienced persons appointed 
for  that  purpose  by  the  licensee.    Persons  fulfilling  management  of  change 
roles, as roles which may affect the safety of operations, should be SQEP. 

LC 36 – Organisational Capability.  The licensee shall provide and maintain 
adequate  financial  and  human  resources  to  ensure  the  safe  operation  of  the 
licensed site, and make and implement arrangements to control any change to 
its organisational structure or resources which may affect safety. 

RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY 
STANDARDS ADDRESSED 

Safety Assessment Principles 

The Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities (2014 Edition, Revision 0) 
provide a framework to guide regulatory decision making in the nuclear permissioning 
process.  They are supported by Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) which further 
aid the decision-making process.  The following principles are of particular relevance to 
this TAG: 

  MS.1  –  Leadership.  Identifies  the  need  for  oversight  of  nuclear  safety 

performance and a Management System. 

  MS.2  –  Capable  Organisation.  Identifies  the  need  for  changes  to  the 
organisation to be systematically evaluated to ensure that they do not adversely 
affect nuclear safety management capabilities. 

  MS.3 – Decision Making. Identifies the need for decision making to be based on 
processes  that  ensure  the  conflict  between  nuclear  safety  and  other  business 
goals,  including  commercial  and  schedule  pressures  and  external  influences, 
are recognised and resolved. 

  MS.4  –  Learning.    Identifies  the  need  for  lessons  to  be  learned  from  internal 
leadership,  organisational 

and  external  sources 
capability, safety decision making and safety performance, 

to  continually 

improve 

 
4. 

4.1 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 3 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) 

4.2 

The following Technical Assessment Guides are applicable to this TAG: 

 

NS-TAST-GD-027 – Training and Assuring Personnel Competence 

This TAG addresses the means by which the licensee demonstrates that it has 
a  systematic  approach  to  identification  and  delivery  of  personnel  competence 
and 
for  assuring  personnel 
its 
competence. 

training  processes  and  arrangements 

 

NS-TAST-GD-049 – Licensee Core and Intelligent Customer Capabilities 

This TAG addresses the means by which the licensee demonstrates that it has 
sufficient in-house expertise to maintain control and oversight of nuclear safety 
at  all  times,  and  the  use  and  oversight  of  contractors  whose  work  has  the 
potential to impact on nuclear safety 

 

NS-TAST-GD-050 – Periodic Safety Reviews 

This  TAG  expects  a  Periodic  Safety  Review  (PSR)  to  review  changes  to  the 
licensee’s  organisational  structure  and  resources  to  consider  their  cumulative 
impact  and  to  determine  if  the  current  position  is  adequate  for  continued  safe 
operation of the plant or site 

 

NS-TAST-GD-065 – Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline 

This  TAG  addresses  the  means  by  which  the  licensee  demonstrates  that  its 
organisational  structure,  staffing  and  competencies  are,  and  remain,  suitable 
and  sufficient  to  manage  nuclear  safety  throughout  the  full  range  of  the 
Licensee’s  business.    It  provides  the  foundation  from  which  organisational 
changes can be assessed. 

 

NS-TAST-GD-061 – Staffing Levels and Task Organisation 

This TAG provides detailed guidance to support the assessment of the 
approaches and methods used by applicants and licensees to derive, validate 
and monitor staffing arrangements; and to specify task organisation, in 
particular, the design of shift work systems and team design.  
NS-TAST-GD-072  –  Function  and  Content  of  a  Safety  Management 
Prospectus  Element  4  of  this  TAG  requires  a  licensee  to  have  adequate 
structures and resources to meet the nuclear safety needs of the business. 

 WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels  

4.3 

The objective of The Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) is 
to develop a common approach to nuclear safety in Europe by comparing national 
approaches to the application of International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA) safety 
standards.  The reference levels in the following harmonisation issues represent good 
practices in the WENRA member states, are relevant, and should be taken into 
account by the Inspector: 

Issue B: Operating Organisation - Organisational Structure.  Identifies the need 
for  the  adequacy  of  the  organisational  structure  to  be  assessed  when 
organisational  changes  are  made,  and  for  changes  to  be  justified  in  advance, 
carefully planned, and evaluated after implementation. 

Issue  C:  Management  System  -  Objectives.    Identifies  the  need  for  the 
management  system  to  achieve  and  enhance  nuclear  safety  by  ensuring  that 
other  demands  on  the  licensee  are  not  considered  separately  from  nuclear 
safety requirements. 

IAEA Safety Standards 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 4 of 25 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

4.4 

The IAEA Safety Standards (Requirements and Guides) were the benchmark for 
revision of the SAPs in 2014 and are recognised by ONR as relevant good practice.  
They should therefore be consulted, where relevant, by the inspector, although it 
should be appreciated that they are design standards rather than regulatory standards.  
The Safety Requirements publication GSR Part 2 ‘Leadership and Management for 
Safety’ (IAEA 2016) is relevant.  It defines the requirements for establishing, 
assessing, sustaining and continuously improving leadership and management for 
safety in organisations.  Requirement 9 focuses on provision of resources and 
requirement 12 focuses on fostering a culture for safety. 

4.5 

GSR Part 2 requires that: 

Provision is made in the management system to identify any changes (including 
organisational  changes)  that  could  have  significant  implications  for  safety  and 
to ensure that they are appropriately analysed; and 

Planned  reviews  of  the  management  system  take  account  of  changes  in  the 
organisation. 

4.6 

The following reports produced by IAEA are also directly relevant: 

INSAG  18  –  Managing  Change  in  the  Nuclear  Industry:  The  Effects  on 
Safety.    This  report  discusses  how  and  why  change  can  challenge  the 
maintenance  of  high  levels  of  safety,  and  what  can  be  done  to  control  that 
challenge and reap all the benefits of change. 

IAEA Safety Guide GS-G-3.1 and GS-G-3.5 – Application of the 
Management System for Facilities and Activities and The Management 
System for Nuclear Installations  

These documents provide generic guidance to aid in establishing, 
implementing, assessing and continually improving a management system. 

 

 

 

 

 
5. 

5.1 

5.2 

5.3 

5.4 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

Background  

LC 36(1), which was introduced by a variation to all extant nuclear site licences in July 
2011, requires the licensee to provide and maintain adequate financial and human 
resources. 

Appendix 4 provides guidance to inspectors on the approach that should be taken to 
assessing the financial resources aspects of this requirement.  However, when this 
variation was introduced, ONR advised that it considered that existing licensees would 
already comply with the requirement to provide and maintain adequate human 
resources, by virtue of their Nuclear Baseline. 

NS-TAST-GD-065 ‘Function and Content of a Nuclear Baseline’ sets out ONR’s 
expectations that a licensee should have a nuclear baseline to provide a 
demonstration that it has suitable and sufficient organisational structures, staffing and 
competences in place to effectively and reliably carry out those activities which 
could impact on nuclear safety. 

NS-TAST-GD-065, supplemented by other guidance such as NS-TAST-GD-027 
‘Training and Assuring Personnel Competence’, is therefore instrumental in setting out 
ONR’s expectations of the way in which a licensee shows that it has, and maintains, 
adequate human resources.  The nuclear baseline also provides a clear description of 
the currently intended staffing levels as a reference point or ‘baseline’ against which 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 5 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.5 

5.6 

5.7 

5.8 

5.9 

5.10 

5.11 

the licensee can assess the potential impact on nuclear safety of proposed 
organisational changes, noting that it will also be affected by changes in business 
objectives such as lifetime extensions. 

LC 36(2) requires the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements to 
control any change to its organisational structure or resources which may affect safety.  
Appendix 1 states the licence condition in full.  ONR interprets this condition to relate 
specifically to nuclear safety although licensees may wish to apply similar 
arrangements to manage changes affecting industrial safety, security, environmental 
matters or other parts of their business. 

The licensee’s management of change arrangements should ensure that the nuclear 
safety implications of a proposed change are fully considered and that risks arising 
from inadequate assessment and implementation of the change are recognised and 
suitably controlled.  These arrangements should be part of a licensee’s management 
system. 

There are many drivers for organisational change and, without formal change 
management, a licensee may not immediately recognise the implications of a 
proposed course of action.  Examples of drivers for organisational change and their 
potential implications are given in Appendix 2. 

It is important that the full implications of a proposed change or a series of changes are 
assessed prior to implementation of the change(s).  This is to guard against a failure to 
consider all relevant factors and potential dependencies between related changes, and 
the potential for 'salami slicing' in which a major change is decomposed into a series of 
lesser changes which are treated independently.  This applies to changes at all levels 
in the organisation including the very top of the organisation i.e. the Board or Executive 
team, where changes in the composition and knowledge of either of these teams can 
have a potentially significant influence over nuclear safety. 

Changes should be classified according to nuclear safety significance. Broad guidance 
for inspectors on the classification of organisational changes is given in Appendix 3.  
The level of assessment required should be proportionate to the potential nuclear 
safety significance of the change. 

It should be noted that replacing one post holder with another post holder on a like-for-
like basis need not constitute a trigger for the application of management of change 
arrangements as this should ordinarily be addressed through the licensee’s 
arrangements made under LC 12.  However, where a number of changes are to be 
undertaken in the same area or there is a consequential effect on roles and 
responsibilities, the arrangements should be applied.  

In addition to this TAG and NS-TAST-GD-065, inspectors should be familiar with the 
nuclear industry GPG on ‘Nuclear Baseline and the Management of Organisational 
Change.  This guidance was produced, and is maintained, by an industry working 
group that includes ONR.  Where licensees are able to demonstrate that their 
arrangements are consistent with the guidance in the GPG, inspectors should regard 
this as meeting the expectations of this TAG and sufficient for compliance with the 
Licence Condition.  The GPG is available on the website of the Safety Director’s 
Forum (nuclearinst.com/Safety-Directors-Forum). 

5.12  For new build organisations, it is important that management of change arrangements 
are fully developed and implemented in sufficient time to allow an adequate period of 
demonstrated working, usually in the region of 12 months prior to the Nuclear Site 
Licensing (NSL) decision. It is recognised that new build organisations develop rapidly 
during the pre-application and early NSL assessment phase of the project. However, 
implementation of these arrangements should enable an organisation to establish and 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 6 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

demonstrate the appropriate level of control, while supporting the development of the 
company’s resourcing strategy. This should enabling ONR to gain confidence in the 
company’s approach to building a nuclear competent organisation.   

5.13  ONR recognises that, unlike mature licensee organisations, a new build organisation 

may not be ‘right first time’ and will continue to evolve, particularly during the early 
stages of a new build project.  The organisation should ensure that its management of 
change arrangements are proportionate to the phase of the project and sufficiently 
flexible to enable rather than constrain organisational development. 

5.14  ONR acknowledges that for low hazard sites, typically those below the REPPIR 

threshold, it may be proportionate for a simplified management of change process to 
be applied.  It is however still important that an adequate risk assessment is 
undertaken for organisational changes on these lower hazard sites to ensure the 
organisational capability is suitable to manage nuclear safety.  It is particularly 
important that a proportionate process allowing flexibility is developed to manage staff 
reduction prior to entry of a site into care and maintenance.  

ONR Permissioning of Organisational Change  

5.15  To introduce flexibility into the permissioning process, licensees may prescribe, with 

ONR agreement ‘derived’ powers for use by ONR usually but not exclusively when 
permissioning the highest category of change proposal. The ‘derived’ powers defined 
in a licensee’s LC 36 arrangements may include agreement, notification, 
acknowledgement and specification but not approval, consent or direction. However, 
derived powers have no formal legal basis and constitute administrative arrangements 
agreed between ONR and the licensee. Inspectors should note that inclusion of 
derived powers are not a prerequisite for the licensee’s LC 36 arrangements to be 
considered as adequate, nor does their use preclude the use of primary powers to 
exercise regulatory control over modifications. This guidance provides advice to 
inspectors on ONR’s expectations for adequate licensee arrangements required under 
LC36 (2).  

5.16  The licensee’s arrangements may also include provision for enhanced implementation 

monitoring and control of a proposed organisational change by ONR, where ONR 
considers that the use of primary or derived power Licence Instruments may not be 
appropriate or proportionate to exercise regulatory control and oversight of a licensee’s 
modification proposal. Where this is the case, the inspector should check that such 
arrangements are consistent with the expectations set out in NS-PER-GD-001 
Revision 2. 

5.17  This guidance provides advice to inspectors on ONR’s expectations for adequate 

licensee arrangements required under LC36 (2). 

Management of Change Principles 

5.18  There are some broad principles which underpin ONR’s expectations of a licensee’s 

management of change arrangements.  These are set out below and then each 
principle is discussed in more detail in the following sections.  

1. 

2. 

The  arrangements  should  be  robust,  incorporated  as  part  of  the  licensee’s 
management  system  and  applied  to  all  activities  that  have  the  potential  to 
impact on nuclear safety; 

The Board of the licensee/Executive should own and support the management 
of  change  arrangements  and  ensure  that  they  are  embedded  throughout  the 
organisation; 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 7 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

The arrangements should reference the nuclear baseline and include a process 
for updating it on a regular basis; 

The arrangements should include an initial screening assessment to identify the 
potential  safety  significance  of  a  change  proposal  and  establish  a  suitable 
categorisation for determining the level of analysis, justification and challenge; 

The  licensee  should  assess  and  justify  the  safety  of  a  proposed  change, 
commensurate  with  its  unmitigated  potential  impact  on  safety  should  the 
change be inadequately conceived or executed, identify and implement suitable 
controls  to  ensure  nuclear  safety  is  not  adversely  affected  and  monitor  the 
implementation of the change.  

The  licensee  should  periodically  review  the  effectiveness  of  the  overall 
arrangements and the changes that have been implemented. 

Principle 1  

A 
licensee’s  management  of  change  arrangements  should  be  robust, 
incorporated as part of the management system and applied to all activities that 
have the potential to impact on nuclear safety. 

5.19  The licensee should have formal, systematic arrangements in place to assess, monitor 
and review organisational changes to ensure that they are managed in a co-ordinated, 
consistent and effective manner.  These arrangements should be owned and 
supported by the licensee Board/Executive. 

5.20  These arrangements, which may under primary powers be approved by ONR, should 
be part of the licensee’s management system, and ideally be integrated with the 
organisation’s HR processes rather than being separate and additional.  This also 
means that the resource implications of change can be considered as part of the 
overall management of the organisation and its capabilities. They should set out the 
roles and responsibilities for managing changes with clearly assigned responsibilities 
for originating, peer review, approval, monitoring, close-out of individual changes and 
post change reviews.  

5.21  The scope of the licensee’s arrangements should include all organisational changes 

that could potentially affect nuclear safety, not just roles and posts included in the 
nuclear baseline.  The licensee needs to be able to demonstrate through a 
proportionate application of its arrangements that it can influence or mitigate the 
impact of such changes so that nuclear safety is not compromised. This may, for 
example, include the impact on the licensee of proposed actions or decisions made by 
parent companies or Parent Body Organisations where these could impact on the 
licensee’s capability or its management of nuclear safety.  The licensee should also 
consider the potential effects on culture and morale arising from the change. 

5.22  The scope of the arrangements should also include important enabling and support 
functions such as human resources, finance and procurement where these have the 
potential either directly, or through consequential change, to impact on the licensee’s 
management of nuclear safety. 

5.23  The arrangements should allow for use of the management of change process as a 

flexible risk assessment tool where appropriate.  Examples of when this might be 
necessary include long-term absences and long-standing vacancies.  The default 
assumption should be that all posts and changes have the potential to affect safety 
management unless it can be demonstrated otherwise.  

5.24  Proposed changes should be assessed using a consistent methodology. The 

methodology should be applied to all proposed changes in order to make and record 
an early judgement of the potential impact on nuclear safety.  ONR’s expectations of a 
methodology are set out in Principles 4 and 5. 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 8 of 25 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.25  Staff involved in ensuring or assuring the quality of management of change proposals 

should be suitably qualified and experienced persons (SQEP) to do so and SQEP 
requirements for staff fulfilling key roles within the arrangements should be clearly 
defined.  The importance of SQEP input to a management of change assessment 
cannot be over emphasised as staff experienced in the management of change 
process can apply that experience and judgement to avoid the potential pitfalls that 
less experienced staff may not be aware of. 

5.26  Staff implementing LC36 arrangements should be given specific training in MOC 

theory and principles as well as the licensee’s arrangements.  They should not be 
deemed to be competent on the basis of seniority. 

5.27  The arrangements should ensure that individual change proposals are clearly identified 

and that details of the change i.e. change category and other important attributes are 
recorded in a change register.  Documentation used to assess, decide upon, monitor, 
review and close-out the change should be retained for current and future reference in 
accordance with the licensee’s arrangements under LC 6. ‘Documents, Records, 
Authorities and Certificates’. 

5.28  The arrangements should consider and, where possible, allow for the reversibility of 

changes or the application of contingency plans should subsequent performance 
monitoring indicate that the change has been inappropriately conceived or 
inadequately implemented.  The extent of the reversibility may be related to the 
significance of the change and the availability of effective countermeasures. For larger, 
more significant changes, consideration should also be given to the options for how the 
objectives of the change can be achieved, including a justification of the chosen option.  
The development of a communications plan should also be considered. 

5.29  All change proposals should be subject to a proportionate level of scrutiny and 

challenge, analogous to expectations for modifications to existing plant made under LC 
22 ‘Modification or Experimentation on Existing Plant’. The level of scrutiny is likely to 
increase with potential significance.  Where the safety significance of a proposed 
change is judged to be high, the arrangements should provide for seeking advice from 
the NSC (or identified equivalent status body where appropriate), and senior 
management oversight of the effectiveness of the process and implementation of 
individual changes.  

5.30  The licensee’s arrangements should require approval to be formally granted by a 

SQEP prior to implementation of a change subject to satisfactory confirmation that any 
enabling actions have been completed, and for the change to be formally signed off on 
completion. 

5.31  The effectiveness of implementation of the arrangements should be routinely 

monitored and reviewed as part of the licensee’s normal assurance processes. 

5.32  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

 

 

The  licensee  has  formal,  documented  management  of  change  arrangements 
which are an integral part of its management system; 

It is clear that the arrangements apply to all aspects of the licensee’s activities, 
including changes at Board or Executive team level, that have the potential to 
affect  nuclear  safety,  and  have  they  been  promulgated  to  all  parts  of  the 
licensee’s organisation; 

The  documented  arrangements  are  clear,  available  to  end  users  and  up  to 
date; 

 

The arrangements use a methodology which is easy to understand and follow; 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 9 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The  methodology  is  being  consistently  interpreted  and  applied  across  the 
licensee organisation; 

Roles  and  responsibilities  for  implementing  the  management  of  change 
arrangements are clearly defined, integrated with the management system and 
understood by staff with management of change process roles; 

SQEP  requirements  for  staff  fulfilling  key  roles  within  the  arrangements  are 
clearly defined; 

Staff  fulfilling  key  management  of  change  arrangements  are  demonstrably 
SQEP  for  those  roles  and  they  have  a  suitable  level  of  authority  within  the 
licensee’s organisation; 

All change proposals are logged in a change register and records are available 
to  substantiate  the  key  decisions  made  in  support  of  significant  changes  in 
accordance with the licensee’s arrangements for LC 6; 

The  arrangements  are  subject  to  the  processes  of  independent  review  and 
audit operated by the licensee. 

Principle 2  

the 
The  Board  of 
management  of  change  arrangements  and  ensure  that  they  are  embedded 
throughout the organisation.  

licensee/Executive  should  own  and  support 

the 

5.33  A licensee’s management of change arrangements should be peer reviewed and 

implemented consistently and effectively, and a visible commitment to these 
arrangements should be made by the licensee Board/Executive.  The Board/Executive 
should be able to show that it actively uses the MOC arrangements and supports the 
management of change process by regularly reinforcing to the workforce the 
importance of having and following a robust change process.  

5.34  The Board/Executive should ensure that SQEP resources are put in place to develop 
the management of change arrangements, to implement them and to maintain 
oversight of the way in which the arrangements are used.  This should include 
provision for suitable levels of challenge and independent peer review of change 
proposals as part of the licensee’s corporate governance arrangements, and for 
seeking advice from the Nuclear Safety Committee or identified equivalent status body 
where appropriate.  

5.35  The management of change arrangements should apply throughout the company, up 

to and including the Executive team and Board, noting that strategic and complex 
changes to the structure or staff composition of a business may often originate at this 
level.  

5.36  Progress with, and the effectiveness of, the implementation of significant, complex 

changes should be regularly monitored by the Board/Executive. The Board/Executive 
should establish an oversight process for this purpose as appropriate.  

5.37 

It is expected that the licensee Board/Executive will proactively discuss significant, 
complex changes with ONR at an early stage.  This will allow the licensee to share its 
intentions with ONR and for ONR to provide advice and guidance as appropriate.  It 
will also help ONR to understand the licensee’s business drivers and to schedule and 
prioritise its own resources as appropriate.  

5.38  The Board/Executive should satisfy itself that management of change arrangements 

are embedded throughout the organisation and that suitable provision is made to 
periodically review the effectiveness of the arrangements, and to monitor the 
cumulative effects of changes on the overall health of the licensee organisation.  It 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 10 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

should ensure that the reasons for, and progress with, significant, complex changes 
are communicated to the workforce.  

5.39  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Board and Executive are able to demonstrate their commitment to effective 
management of organisational change;  

The Board and Executive has regularly satisfied itself that the management of 
change  arrangements  are  adequate  and  that  they  are  being  implemented 
effectively;  

There  is  a  governance  process  that  ensures  appropriate  oversight  of,  and 
challenge to, all proposed changes;  

The Board/Executive is involved in assessing the implications of changes which 
may have a greater potential impact on nuclear safety as part of the licensee’s 
governance arrangements;  

The Board/Executive is aware of the need to discuss more significant, complex 
changes with ONR at an early stage;  

The  licensee’s  governance  arrangements  provide  for  an  oversight  process  to 
monitor  implementation  and  provide  strategic  guidance  and  support  for  more 
significant changes; 

The  Board/Executive  regularly  seeks  assurance  that  implementation  of  more 
significant and complex changes is proceeding satisfactorily;  

The  licensee’s  communication  arrangements  adequately  convey  the  reasons 
for, and progress with, implementation of significant changes to the workforce.  

Principle 3  

A  licensee’s  management  of  change  arrangements  should  reference  the 
nuclear baseline and include a process for updating it on a regular basis.  

5.40  A licensee should have a nuclear baseline which provides a demonstration that it has 

suitable and sufficient organisation structures, staffing and competences in place to 
effectively and reliably carry out those activities which could impact on nuclear safety.   

5.41  The nuclear baseline should act as a reference point or ‘baseline’ against which the 

licensee can assess the potential impact on nuclear safety of proposed organisational 
changes.  Individual change assessments should reference the baseline where the 
proposed change is likely to have an impact on it.  

5.42  The baseline should be dynamic and updated as changes are made to the 

organisational structure and resources, and periodically reviewed to consolidate 
changes.  

5.43  The nuclear baseline should be used as an integral part of the licensees resourcing 

processes.  

5.44  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

The baseline is up to date and reflective of the licensee’s current organisation;  

  Management  of  change  assessments  include  a  reference  to  the  nuclear 
baseline  and  identify  whether  or  not  the  proposed  changes  affect  baseline 
roles;  

 

The  nuclear  baseline  is  regularly  reviewed  to  ensure  that  it  is  up  to  date  and 
incorporates changes affecting baseline roles;  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 11 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

The  management  of  change  arrangements  take  account  of  the  cumulative 
effects of low category changes on the nuclear baseline;  

The  management  of  change  arrangements 
vulnerabilities when completing the risk assessment of the change; 

take  account  of  baseline 

The management of change arrangements are integrated with human resource 
processes;  

There  is  evidence  that  the  resource  implications  of  proposed  changes  are 
shared with human resources as part of the change assessment process;  

Resource actions arising from individual management of change assessments 
have been closed and, if not, that unresolved actions are being managed.  

Principle 4  

A  licensee’s  management  of  change  arrangements  should  include  an  initial 
screening  assessment  to  identify  the  potential  safety  significance  of  a 
change proposal and establish a suitable categorisation for determining the 
level of analysis, justification and challenge.  

5.45 

It is important that a proposed change is assessed prior to implementation to ensure 
that the implications of the change are fully understood.  The assessment can be 
considered as an organisational risk assessment which identifies the potential risks 
associated with the proposed change, including risks arising both from the outcome of 
a proposed change and the process of transition.  

5.46  The licensee’s management of change arrangements should include provision for an 

initial screening assessment to identify the potential nuclear safety significance of a 
proposed change in the event that the change is inadequately conceived or executed.  
The output of this assessment should be used to inform the classification of the 
change (as required by LC 36 (5)) which in turn is related to the level of analysis, 
justification and scrutiny that the licensee gives to the change proposal.  The screening 
assessment should be formally recorded in a management of change register once 
internal licensee approval to further develop the proposal has been gained. 

5.47  Change classification or categorisation methodology should consider the risks 

associated with the change being inadequately conceived or executed, and should not 
take planned mitigation into account.  ONR expects the change classification or 
category of all changes to be independently challenged prior to implementation 
proportionally.  

5.48  ONR normally expects the number of change proposals which fall into the top category 

to be relatively few.  These ordinarily include proposals which constitute wholesale 
organisational change or which potentially challenge the basis upon which the licence 
was granted.  Licensees usually have three further categories of change proposal for 
less significant changes.  Broad guidance on classification of organisational changes 
is given in Appendix 3 for illustrative purposes, and there is guidance in the GPG.  

5.49  The licensee’s arrangements should make appropriate provision for engaging ONR 

and, in the case of significant or complex changes, early engagement.  This will allow 
ONR to provide advice and guidance to the licensee as appropriate and should 
simplify ONR permissioning of such changes since it will have prior knowledge of the 
rationale for the change and gained confidence in the licensee’s approach to 
assessing the implications of the change.  This early engagement is particularly 
important in a number of cases, for example where a licensee is planning to reduce 
staff numbers through a redundancy programme where a statutory consultation period 
may apply.  ONR will expect engagement to have commenced before the statutory 
consultation period is invoked.  Further examples include where significant change is 
planned to the management of the organisation. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 12 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

  

5.50  ONR expects:  

 

 

The  licensee’s  arrangements  to  affirm  that  Category  1  changes  shall  not 
proceed  without  the  formal  agreement  of  ONR  and  for  such  changes  to  be 
submitted  in  writing  to  ONR  in  accordance  with  LC  36  (5).    In  such 
circumstances it is prudent for the licensee to ensure that sufficient time is built 
into  the  change  programme  to  provide  for  ONR  assessment  of  the  proposed 
change.  The licensee should facilitate this through early engagement with ONR 
so that the level of regulatory interest can be established and resources can be 
put in place to assess the change.   

The  licensee’s  arrangements  for  Category  2  change  proposals  should  require 
the  change  to  be  submitted  in  writing  to  ONR  a  suitable  period  before  the 
proposed implementation date.  This is at least 20 working days.  If, during this 
period,  ONR  informs  the  licensee  in  writing  that  ONR  wishes  to  review  the 
proposal  before  it  proceeds,  the  licensee’s  arrangements  should  confirm  that 
the  change  will  not  proceed  until  ONR  agreement  is  obtained.  It  is,  again, 
clearly  in  the  licensee’s  interests  to  give  ONR  early  notice  of  Category  2 
changes  where  possible  so  that  any  potential  issues  can  be  discussed  and 
resolved  without  undue  impact  on  the  licensee’s  programme  or  a  need  to 
invoke  the  derived  power  in  the  licensee’s  arrangements.    Where  ONR  does 
not  intend  to  exercise  the  derived  power  and  permission  the  change,  ONR 
should  formally  communicate  this  to  the  licensee  in  writing  so  that  it  may 
proceed  with  the  proposed  change  earlier  if  it  chooses.    The  basis  for  ONR’s 
decision not to exercise the derived power should be documented.  

 

Category 3 and 4 changes should be entered into the licensee’s management 
of  change  register  which  should  be  available  for  periodic  sampling  by  the 
inspector. If ONR informs the licensee in writing that ONR wishes to review the 
proposal  before  it  proceeds,  the  licensee’s  arrangements  should  confirm  that 
the change will not proceed until ONR agreement is obtained.   

5.51  Where an agreement, in accordance with the licensee’s own arrangements, is needed 
from ONR to allow a proposed change to proceed, the inspector should arrange for the 
change to be formally assessed, and a Project Assessment Report (PAR) produced, in 
accordance with ONR’s permissioning procedure.  Once ONR is satisfied that the 
change may proceed, a Licence Instrument will be issued to the licensee to permission 
the change.  

5.52  Application of the classification methodology and implementation of management of 
change arrangements should not allow changes, which if assessed in totality could 
constitute a Category 1 or 2 change, to be reduced to a number of smaller, lower 
significance changes i.e. the arrangements should not allow ‘salami slicing’.  

5.53  Over time, and with experience, a licensee may develop an appreciation of the likely 

category for individual changes and will form a view based on an initial, informal 
assessment.  This initial assessment should not be used in place of a comprehensive 
assessment for significant changes, nor should the change originator pre-judge the 
categorisation of a change without an appropriate assessment of the implications of 
the change.  

5.54  Some changes may be borderline between two classifications or categories.  In these 
situations ONR expects the licensee to take a conservative position and consider the 
change at the higher level.  Some changes may attract key stakeholder interest.  In 
these situations ONR expects the change to be categorised in accordance with the 
licensee’s arrangements.  Occasionally a higher level of scrutiny can be applied; this 
will be viewed positively but is not expected to be normally adopted.   

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 13 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.55  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

An  initial  screening  assessment  has  been  prepared  to  identify  the  potential 
impact of the change proposal on nuclear safety significance and categorise the 
proposal;  

The  risk  assessment  uses  a  clear,  consistent  and  well-informed  approach 
which identifies potential risks arising both from the final outcome of the change 
and the process of transition;  

The  classification  methodology  is  easy  to  understand  and  is  being  applied 
objectively and consistently, throughout the licensee’s organisation;  

There  is  a  checking  process  to  confirm  that  changes  have  been  correctly 
categorised and challenged by a SQEP;  

Safeguards  are  in  place  to  avoid  under-categorisation  of  changes  or  ‘salami 
slicing’;  

The  licensee’s  arrangements  identify,  and  meet  ONR’s  expectations  for,  the 
need to communicate Category 1 and 2 change proposals to ONR and include 
a derived power which  will allow  ONR to provide formal  agreement to change 
proposals as set out in the bullet points in paragraph 5.16; 

The licensee’s arrangements encourage authors of change proposals to make 
provision for timely engagement with ONR. 

Principle 5  

The  licensee  should  assess  and  justify  the  safety  of  a  proposed  change, 
commensurate  with  its  potential  impact  on  safety,  identify  and  implement 
suitable  controls  to  ensure  nuclear  safety  is  not  adversely  affected  and 
monitor the implementation of the change 

5.56  Changes which are identified via the initial screening assessment as falling into 

categories 1, 2 and 3, as illustrated in Appendix 3, should be subject to a more detailed 
assessment which is documented as part of the justification for the change.  The 
justification should ordinarily include:  

A statement of the reason for and objectives of the change. This is typically 
identified in the ‘initial screening assessment’;  

A risk assessment;  

An implementation plan.  

5.57  Changes assessed as having a significant potential impact on nuclear safety i.e. 

Categories 1, 2 should be subject to a more detailed risk assessment which is 
documented as part of the justification for the change.  The risk assessment should be 
proportionate to the nuclear safety significance and complexity of the change being 
proposed.  The assessment should identify the ‘enablers’, or arrangements that need 
to be put in place to facilitate the change proposal and ensure that risks are controlled.  
These should include actions required to mitigate the risks arising from both the final 
outcome of the change and during transition as appropriate.  The licensee may identify 
a need to undertake a formal workload assessment for changes that have the potential 
to impact on the workload of an individual(s).  

5.58 

In many cases achieving an adequate assessment is unlikely without active 
consultation with the staff affected by the proposed change at an appropriate stage.  
Although this can be sensitive, many post holders will have a unique knowledge of how 
they carry out their work and what its demands are.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 14 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.59  The risk assessment for a large, complex change proposal may indicate that it is 

preferable to divide the overall change into smaller, more manageable elements.  This 
may have advantages in that elements can be assigned to different leads that have 
better-defined responsibilities and knowledge for taking a change forward.  However, 
there are risks in this approach because potential dependencies between these 
elements may be missed.  For example, an individual responsible for one element may 
make assumptions about the continued provision of resources or arrangements that 
might be affected by changes to other elements.  

5.60 

In such instances, the licensee should produce an umbrella or ‘overarching’ 
management of change proposal to define the scope of the overall proposal and set a 
single, coherent framework for managing the different elements which are 
encompassed within it.  The risk assessment for the overarching management of 
change should reference the risks related to specific elements, but should also take a 
broader cross-cutting perspective. It should also consider risks arising at the interfaces 
between the various elements. 

5.61  ONR expects the licensee to put in place suitable processes for endorsing change 

proposals.  Usually, Category 3 and 4 changes may be endorsed by the originator or 
local process owner following an independent review of the classification or category.  
However, Category 1 and 2 changes should be endorsed by an individual who has a 
full understanding of the implications of the proposed change.  Such individuals are 
more likely to be at a more senior level in the licensee organisation.  

5.62  As noted in Principle 3, justification documents for Category 1 and 2 arrangements 

may need advice by a Nuclear Safety Committee or an equivalent body in accordance 
with the licensee’s arrangements.  

5.63  The mitigating actions and enablers identified in the risk assessment should, following 

endorsement, be addressed in an implementation plan.  The implementation plan 
should show how the mitigating actions and enablers will be delivered and managed.  
It should include a clear definition of responsibilities for taking forward the change and 
maintaining a suitable level of managerial oversight.  For example, the inspector 
should be able to find evidence that documentation has been endorsed to confirm that 
enabling actions have been completed and to confirm that the change may proceed.  

5.64  The output of a risk assessment may indicate that it is preferable to introduce the 

change on a phased or staged basis as a means of best managing the risks 
associated with the change.  This should be reflected in the implementation plan, and 
the licensee should consider introducing stage gates, or hold points, as necessary to 
manage the process.  ONR interaction may be considered appropriate by the licensee 
or ONR for some of these stages, depending on the nuclear safety significance.  

5.65  The implementation plan should also include indicators that can be used to monitor 

progress in implementing the change and provide confidence that no adverse effects 
are being realised.  These indicators may be qualitative or quantitative as appropriate.  
They should primarily be ‘leading’ indicators that consider the potential consequences 
of the change being inadequately conceived or executed such as training completed; 
overtime worked; maintenance backlogs etc., rather than ‘lagging’ indicators which 
typically monitor reduction in accident rates.  

5.66  Significant changes i.e. those identified as Category 1 or 2 in Appendix 3, should have 

Board/Executive oversight, using indicators and any other appropriate measures, to 
confirm that changes are being correctly managed.  In the event that a change is not 
proceeding satisfactorily the Board/Executive should identify and sponsor remedial 
action.  This monitoring should be proportionate to the significance of the change and 
continue for the life of the change. It should also include a post-completion review to 
confirm that the objectives of the change have been satisfactorily achieved.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 15 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.67  Where possible, the implementation plan should reflect potential contingency actions 

that may be required in the event that the change is not proceeding as planned.  
Where potential consequences are high it may be appropriate for the licensee to 
maintain for a suitable period the capability to reverse the change.  

5.68 

Justification documents should be formally signed off when the change is complete 
and should be retained as a record in accordance with the licensee’s LC 6 
arrangements.  It can be helpful to ‘close out’ the change at an appropriate date, after 
the outcome has been monitored and sufficient confidence has been gained that the 
change need not be reversed or altered significantly.  

5.69  Under LC36 (6), ONR may direct a licensee to halt a change to its organisation 

structure or resources if it is concerned the change may have been inadequately 
conceived or executed.  In practice, it is envisaged that this power will be used rarely.  
In such circumstances, ONR and the licensee should discuss the proposed change 
and seek to resolve any issues such that an agreed way forward is established. If ONR 
is content that the proposed change, amended if necessary, may proceed then it will 
provide a formal consent to permit it to progress.  

5.70  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Assessments  of  proposed  changes  are  proportionate  to  the  significance  and 
category of the change;  

Assessments  have  been  carried  out  by  competent  persons  and  adequately 
consider 
the  change  be 
inadequately conceived or executed;  

the  range  of  potential  consequences  should 

The  licensee  has  acknowledged  the  need  to  develop  an  ‘overarching 
‘management of change assessment as a means of defining and coordinating 
larger, more complex changes;  

The  licensee’s  arrangements  provide  for  a  staged  approach  to  implementing 
larger,  complex  changes  and  make  provision  for  ONR  intervention  as 
appropriate;  

Justification documents have been formally endorsed to confirm that proposed 
changes  may  proceed  and  signed  off  upon  completion  of  necessary  enabling 
actions by a SQEP; 

Changes  have  been  adequately  documented  to  enable  the  objective  of  the 
change, and the change categorisation to be clearly understood; 

Enabling and mitigating actions for Category 1 and 2 changes are relevant and 
satisfactorily address the identified risks;  

The  licensee’s  senior  management  and  the  Nuclear  Safety  Committee  have 
been  involved  in  considering  the  implications  a  Category  1  change  prior  to  
implementation;  

Arrangements  are  in  place  in  the  licensee  organisation  to  monitor  Category  1 
and 2 changes and, in the event that a change is not proceeding satisfactorily, 
to initiate remedial action;  

Suitable  qualitative  or  quantitative 
indicators  have  been  developed 
significant changes and if they are linked to enabling and remedial actions;  

for 

The indicators are being used to monitor the effectiveness of implementation of 
significant changes;  

There  is  a  process  to  check  the  quality  and  consistency  of  justification 
documents;  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 16 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

Justification  documents  are  filed  within  a  site-wide  system  and  available  for 
scrutiny;  

There  is  a  post-change  review  process  to  enable  learning  points  from 
successful  and  unsuccessful  changes  to  be  taken  into  account  for  future 
changes  and,  if  appropriate,  incorporated  into  the  licensee’s  management  of 
change arrangements.  

Principle 6  

The  licensee  should  periodically  review  the  effectiveness  of  the  overall 
arrangements and the changes that have been implemented.  

5.71  The licensee should be encouraged to capture the learning gained from applying its 

management of change process, especially to larger and more complex changes.  This 
should be reflected, where appropriate, in changed arrangements e.g. training.  The 
arrangements themselves should be subject to periodic review to confirm that they are 
working satisfactorily and to identify process improvements.  Reviews may take the 
form of formal audit by a licensee’s assurance function or management reviews as part 
of a structured approach to business improvement.  

5.72 

It is important that the senior management are engaged in the review process to 
demonstrate leadership and commitment to the management of change arrangements.  
The effectiveness of the arrangements, and the totality of changes and their impact on 
the organisation, should be regularly reviewed by them to ensure that the 
arrangements are working satisfactorily and that the organisation is not being 
degraded as a result of a succession of changes.  

5.73  The inspector should consider whether or not:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The arrangements provide for the Board/Executive to monitor the effectiveness 
of implementation of more significant changes;  

There  is  a  formal  review  process  to  confirm  that  the  management  of  change 
arrangements are operating satisfactorily;  

Senior  management  are  engaged  in  the  review  process  and  how  their 
leadership and commitment is demonstrated to the workforce;  

The  review  process  involves  persons  other  than  those  with  a  management  of 
change  process  role  to  ensure  that  the  views  of  originators and  implementers 
are captured; 

The outcome of reviews is shared with the workforce;  

There is a mechanism for sharing learning and building that learning back into 
the arrangements as part of continuous improvement;  

The  cumulative  effects  of  multiple  changes  on  the  organisation  have  been 
considered by senior management and if there is any evidence of action being 
taken to avoid the potential degradation of the licensee organisation.  

 

6. 

APPENDICES    

APPENDIX 1: LICENCE CONDITION 36 ‘ORGANISATIONAL CAPABILITY’ 

6.1 

Licence Condition 36 requires that:  

 

The  licensee  shall  provide  and  maintain  adequate  financial  and  human 
resources to ensure the safe operation of the licensed site.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 17 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

  Without prejudice to the requirements of paragraph 1, the licensee shall make 
its 

implement  adequate  arrangements 

and 
organisational structure or resources which may affect safety.  

to  control  any  change 

to 

 

 

 

 

The  licensee  shall  submit  to  ONR  for  approval  such  part  or  parts  of  the 
aforesaid arrangements as the Executive may specify.  

The  licensee  shall  ensure  that  once  approved  no  alteration  or  amendment  is 
made  to  the  approved  arrangements  unless  the  ONR  has  approved  such 
alteration or amendment.  

The  aforesaid  arrangements  shall  provide  for  the  classification  of  changes  to 
the organisational structure or resources according to their safety significance.  
The  arrangements  shall  include  a  requirement  for  the  provision  of  adequate 
documentation  to  justify  the  safety  of  any  proposed  change  and  shall  where 
appropriate provide for the submission of such documentation to the ONR.  

The  licensee  shall  if  so  directed  by  the  ONR  halt  the  change  to  its 
organisational  structure  or  resources  and  the  licensee  shall  not  recommence 
such change without the consent of the ONR.  

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 18 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

APPENDIX 2: EXAMPLES OF DRIVERS FOR ORGANISATIONAL CHANGE 

6.2 

This appendix provides some examples of drivers for organisational change and the 
potential implications for nuclear safety if a change is inadequately conceived or 
executed.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cost  reduction.    This  may  result  in  inadequate  resources  being  available  to 
fulfil baseline organisational roles.  

Sales,  acquisitions,  mergers  or  creation  of  subsidiary  companies.    This 
may  lead  to  a  loss  of  nuclear  related  expertise  at  Board  and  Executive  level, 
resulting in a lack of understanding of what is required to maintain the defence 
in  depth  which  is  essential  to  the  achievement  of  very  high  levels  of  safety.  
Corporate  mergers  may  result  in  a  lack  of  harmonisation  of  standards  and 
procedures,  and  a 
responsibilities  and 
lack  of  clarity  of  managerial 
accountabilities.  

Downsizing,  re-engineering  and  outsourcing. 
in 
understaffing  and  lack  of  competent  staff  or  'intelligent  customer'  capability  to 
make  an  informed  judgement.    It  may  lead  to  instances  where  there  is 
insufficient  competent  staff  available  to  assess  the  safety  significance  of 
activities with the potential to impact on nuclear safety, or the loss of ‘corporate 
memory’ in a particular field.  

  This  may 

result 

Reduction  of  the  numbers  of  layers  of  management.    This  may  result  in 
inadequate supervision or oversight of staff work, or an unacceptable increase 
in individual workload or management spans of control. 

Organisational  development.    This  is  particularly  appropriate  in  the  case  of 
new  build  organisations  where  the  organisation  structure  may  change  several 
times as the project progress both within a particular project phase and as the 
project progresses from one phase to the next. 

Organisational  restructuring  and  change  initiatives.    This  may  result  in 
competent staff being diverted to restructuring/change projects.  

Downgrading  the  Head  of  Safety  post  so  that  he  or  she  is  no  longer  a 
member of the licensee’s Executive or Board, resulting in a loss of independent, 
authoritative advice for nuclear safety at Board level.  

Relocation of offices.  This may result in the loss of key staff and expertise in 
critical areas.  

Changes  in  policies  for  recruitment  and  training  of  staff.    This  may  result 
from national skills shortages, demographics etc leading to vacancies not being 
filled,  recruitment  of  poor  quality  staff,  and  degradation  of  the  competence  of 
individuals and the organisation as a whole. 

Change  in  Board  /  Executive.    Although  not  necessarily  an  organisational 
change  this  change  could  still result  in  significant  safety  risks.    Organisational 
change control can be used as a flexible risk assessment tool in these cases, 
which is seen as good practice, allowing the organisation to manage potential 
risks.  

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 19 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

APPENDIX 3 : BROAD GUIDANCE ON CLASSIFICATION OF ORGANISATIONAL 
CHANGES 

6.3 

The approach to classifying changes may vary according to licensee. The following 
example classifications are provided for illustrative purposes to guide the inspector:  

 

Category 1 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result 
in a major reduction in the standards of nuclear safety with the potential for on-
site and off-site impact such as:  

o  Wide  ranging  company  or  site  changes  that  have  the  potential  to  affect  the 

validity of, or basis on which, the nuclear site licence was granted.  

o  Changes resulting in the granting of a new site licence.  

o  Sale, acquisition or merger of a licensee organisation or a nuclear licensed site.  

o  Changes involving more than one business unit, division or site.  

o  Large-scale downsizing or outsourcing of a nuclear safety significant function.  

 

Category 2 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result 
in a significant reduction in the standards of nuclear safety with the potential to 
affect a large proportion of or the whole of a site such as:  

o  Changes that affect people within a whole facility.  

o  Changes that affect a whole department or large groups of staff.  

o  Changes that affect several layers of management.  

o  Significant reduction in the size of a team that has an EH&S role.  

o  Changes  with  significant  potential  to  adversely  impact  on  a  site’s  emergency 

response.  

o  Changes  resulting  in  a  significant  transfer  of  key  EH&S  accountabilities  and 

responsibilities such as those associated with DAP duties. 

o  Changes in staff shift patterns   

 

Category 3 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result 
in  a  minor  reduction  in  the  standards  of  nuclear  safety  with  the  potential  to 
affect a single plant, department or business unit such as:  

o  Changes that affect staff within one process area or a significant part of a plant.  

o  Changes that affect a small group of staff, such as part of a department.  

o  Small reduction in the size of a team.  

o  Changes  in  management  accountabilities/responsibilities  that  have  a  small 

impact on EH&S.  

o  Transfer of responsibilities between departments/units. 

 

 Category 4 changes with negligible or no effect on nuclear safety such as:  

o  Changes  to  organisational  responsibilities  that  do  not  lead  to  a  significant 

increase in the workload of any line manager or group of staff.  

o  A reduction in the size of a team that has little or no EH&S role.  

o  Staff  being  moved  or  leaving  following  completion  of  a  project  or  package  of 

work. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 20 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

APPENDIX  4:  GUIDANCE  TO  INSPECTORS  ON  THE  APPROACH  TO  BE 
UNDERTAKEN  FOR  ASSURING  COMPLIANCE  WITH  THE  ‘ADEQUACY  OF 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES’ ASPECT OF LC 36(1) 

The purpose of this appendix is to support a proportionate and consistent regulatory 
approach to ONR inspection and assessment against the financial resources aspect of 
LC 36 (1) ‘Organisational Capability’.  

Purpose and scope  

Background  

Article 6(5) of the Nuclear Safety Directive 2009/71/Euratom requires member states to 
ensure that licensees are required to provide and maintain adequate financial and 
human resources to fulfil their obligations in respect of nuclear safety.  In order to 
ensure that this requirement was fully transposed in Great Britain, LC 36 was changed 
in July 2011 to introduce a revised LC 36(1) which requires licensees to provide and 
maintain adequate financial and human resources to ensure the safe operation of the 
licensed site.  

ONR consulted with all nuclear site licence holders on this amendment (and a 
proposed modification to LC 17) and conducted an impact assessment.  ONR also 
published a supporting note advising that ONR considered licensees would already 
comply with the requirement to provide and maintain adequate human resources, by 
virtue of their Nuclear Baseline.  The note also stated that: “On a day-to-day basis, 
compliance with legal duties to ensure an appropriate level of nuclear safety is likely to 
be sufficient evidence of compliance with the licence condition regarding the licensee’s 
existing financial resources”.  With regard to the requirement to maintain adequate 
financial resources, ONR’s view is that the licensee should be able to clearly 
demonstrate that it:  

 

 

 

 

 

Understands  the  hazards  and  risks  of  its  undertakings  and  is  operating  in 
accordance with its safety case and complying with the licence conditions;  

Is  reducing  risk  so  far  as  is  reasonably  practicable,  and  implementing 
improvements in a timely manner where these are identified as ALARP;  

Is  maintaining  an  adequate  Nuclear  Baseline  resource  and  implementing  its 
arrangements for managing organisational change set out under LC 36(2);  

Has  assessed  what  financial  resources  are  necessary  to  continue  to  meet 
those needs;  

Has, and is maintaining, or has in place arrangements to obtain, the necessary 
financial resources; and  

 

Has relevant records and they are being retained in accordance with LC 6.  

Guidance on inspection of arrangements 

Regulatory Approach 

6.7 

The financial resources of a licensee are not ordinarily the focus of routine inspection 
activities.  Rather, inspectors should be alert to indirect evidence that may indicate a 
reduction in the ability or willingness of the licensee to provide or maintain adequate 
financial resources to ensure safety.  Evidence may include failure to resource plant 
improvements; staff shortages that are not being filled; delays in delivering activities 
such as maintenance etc.  Should indications be found that investment in safety-
related plant or people may not be adequate to provide and maintain safety, the 
inspector should seek to establish whether it is attributable to other factors (for 
example difficulties in identifying SQEP resource; technical difficulties or 
disagreements etc.) and, if so, to progress the matter in the normal manner.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 21 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

6.8 

If the safety issue cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the inspector, and financial 
resource issues are identified as a possible factor, this matter should be elevated to 
the relevant Superintending Inspector and Professional lead for consideration.  It is 
anticipated that discussions will take place with the licensee to determine the cause of 
the issue and attempt to resolve it.  This may entail an ONR review of safety cases; 
annual financial accounts, plans for construction and key financial decision points; 
investment plans; lifetime plans, the nuclear baseline and other documents.  If the 
issue cannot be resolved, and failure to comply with LC 36(1) is suspected, 
consideration may be given to engaging external expert financial advice to inform the 
process of establishing ONR’s enforcement options.  The need to take this course of 
action is expected to be rare.  

6.9  Where the licensee's budget is controlled by another body (for example, the Nuclear 

Decommissioning Authority (NDA) or a parent organisation), financial (and other 
resourcing) arrangements are likely to be set out in contractual arrangements such as 
a Shareholders Agreement between the licensee and the controlling body.  ONR may 
seek to examine these documents.  ONR anticipates that the controlling body will co-
operate with the licensee in ensuring the adequacy of the resources needed for safety, 
and to meet its obligations under HSWA Section 3(1).  The licensee, however, retains 
an absolute responsibility for nuclear safety.  

Government assurances regarding a licensee’s financial standing  

6.10  ONR will approach the relevant government department at the time of processing a 

licence application, or responding to a request for relicensing, to seek its assurances 
regarding the applicant’s financial status.  ONR may, on rare occasions when it deems 
it relevant, also seek such assurances from government to inform ONR’s approach 
set out in paragraphs 6.7 to 6.9 above.  Government assurances will be used by 
ONR to provide confidence that, at the point of licensing, an organisation’s financial 
arrangements are adequate to enable it to fulfil its obligations as a nuclear site 
licence holder.  Subsequent to the granting of a licence, the approach set out in 
paragraphs 6.7 to 6.9 above will be followed. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 22 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 APPENDIX 5: GUIDANCE FOR INSPECTORS ON THE FACTORS THAT MAY BE 
CONSIDERED  WHEN  INSPECTING  THE  LICENSEE’S  IMPLEMENTATION  OF  ITS 
MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE ARRANGEMENTS 

6.11  The following ‘short-form’ guidance is provided to assist inspectors to judge the 

adequacy of licensees’ arrangements to comply with LC 36 clauses (2) to (5).  In order 
to promote a consistent regulatory approach, this appendix incorporates guidance 
previously included within the inspection guidance T/INS/036.  This Appendix 
complements the more detailed guidance in the main body of this TAG and reference 
to that material should be made where appropriate.  

Management of change arrangements  

6.12 

Interview a sample of Board, Executive and Lead Team members to examine their 
knowledge of:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The importance of management of change arrangements as an integral part of 
business strategy implementation, nuclear safety and resource management;  

The  need  for  the  Board/Executive  to  visibly  commit  to  management  of 
organisational change as a key business process;  

The  need  for  the  implications  of  all  proposed  organisational  changes  to  be 
formally  assessed  using  a  consistent  methodology which  is  an integral  part  of 
the licensee’s management system;  

The  Board/Executive’s  role  in  ensuring  that  the  implications  of  significant  and 
complex changes are fully assessed prior to implementation; 

The  Board/Executive’s  role  in  providing  oversight  of  significant  and  complex 
changes and ensuring that the objectives of the changes are met; 

The  importance  of  regularly  monitoring  the state  of  the organisation to  ensure 
that  nuclear  safety  is  not  progressively  degraded  over  time  as  a  result  of  a 
succession of changes; 

The  need  to  regularly  review  that  the  licensee’s  management  of  change 
arrangements  are  up  to  date  and  are  being  consistently  applied  across  the 
entirety of the licensee organisation; 

 

The importance of having SQEPs in key management of change roles. 

6.13  Check that the baseline contains a substantiation of the ‘right size and structure’ for the 
licensee organisation.  Check that there is not a presumption that the existing structure 
is adequate.  

6.14  Check that the arrangements are linked to human resource processes and that Human 
Resources is involved in assessing implications of changes for workforce planning and 
training, and taking action as appropriate.  

6.15 

Interview some of the managers proposing changes and key role holders such as 
reviewers to examine their knowledge of:  

Roles and responsibilities;  

Staging of changes where appropriate;  

 

The  value  of  enabling  actions  which  have  been  properly  identified  and 
managed i.e. verifiably closed out;  

Use of performance indicators and contingency measures or remedial actions, 
and that they have been properly identified and managed;  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 23 of 25 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The importance of reviews at appropriate times during implementation.  

Records requirements. 

6.16  Confirm that the arrangements are being adhered to by discussion with staff at various 

levels throughout the licensee’s organisation.  

6.17  Check the change register and observe if:  

There  are  similar,  linked  changes  which  should  have  been  managed  in  a 
coordinated  manner  i.e.  under  an  umbrella  or  overarching  management  of 
change, and given a higher change category; 

There is evidence of ‘salami slicing’ of a larger change into a series of smaller 
changes.  

6.18  Check the licensee's implementation of its review and audit processes and examine:  

Periodic review and update of the nuclear baseline;  

Reviews of performance indicators during and after implementation;  

Categorisation reviews;  

Independent safety reviews;  

Reviews of implementation of the arrangements and plans for improvement.  

Reviews of cumulative effects of change on the organisation.  

6.19  Check the licensee’s communication arrangements to confirm whether or not the 

workforce understands the implications of significant changes and is kept informed of 
implementation progress.  

 

Check that arrangements exist to periodically update the nuclear baseline and 
that the baseline is up to date and reflective of the licensee organisation.  

Implementation of change proposals  

6.20  Select a sample of change proposals for checking.  The sample should include top 

category changes if there have been any, and lower category changes throughout the 
range of significance.  The sample should ideally include any corporate changes which 
may affect safety on site.  Consider ‘calling in’ changes (at any or all category levels) 
for specialist assessment.  

6.21  For each change proposal in the sample:  

 

Check  the  register  of  change  proposals  to  confirm  that  change  proposals  for 
significant  changes  were  reviewed  and  authorised  through  the  appropriate 
route  and  available  in  time  to  provide  20  working  days’  notice  for  ONR 
assessment prior to implementation if required.  

  Make a judgement about the accuracy of the classification of the change.  

  

 

Check that the substantiation document for significant changes includes where 
appropriate: 

o  A clear description of the objectives of the change; 

o  A reference to the nuclear baseline; 

o  A  risk  assessment  which  has  been  used  to  inform  the  classification  of  the 

o  A detailed implementation plan with timescales, including staging of the change 

change; 

where appropriate; 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 24 of 25 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

o  Enabling actions as precursors to implementation of the change; 

o  Performance indicators to monitor the effectiveness of implementation; 

o  Contingency plans and remedial actions; 

o  Shadow working to confirm planned arrangements where appropriate.  

Check that authorisation to proceed with the proposed change was granted by 
a SQEP.  

Check that all enabling actions for significant changes were satisfactorily closed 
out  before  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  change  were  implemented.  Verify  a 
sample of the actions if appropriate.  

Check  that  the  performance  indicators  were  used  to  monitor  implementation 
progress  and  that  contingency  plans  or  remedial  actions  were  invoked  at  an 
appropriate time.  

Check that the change proposal was signed off as complete by a SQEP.  

Check that the objectives of the change were met.  

Check  that  any  staff  implications  have  been  satisfactorily  addressed,  for 
example:  

o  Vacancy filling and recruitment;  

o  Training and development.  

Check that the baseline has been updated to reflect the impact on baseline 
roles where appropriate.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 
TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 

Page 25 of 25 

 
 

