oversight of items or services cns-tast-gd-4.3.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

OVERSIGHT OF SUPPLIERS OF ITEMS OR SERVICES OF NUCLEAR SECURITY 
SIGNIFICANCE 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/106068) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 

7.  SUPPLY CHAIN OVERSIGHT AND ASSURANCE ............................................................ 4 

8.  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 8 

9.  GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................. 9 

 

© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 
 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 9 

 

 
1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 1). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 2). 

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance (CS&IA) documentation that helps them demonstrate 
ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The 
SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their 
assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  
This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s supply 
chain management arrangements.  It aims to provide general advice and guidance to 
ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out 
how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the detail, 
targets or methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have 
addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe 
this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate. 

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. 

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an 
important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation. 

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 3) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 4). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 2 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that ‘a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied’. The importance of issues 
relating to assurance activities are also recognised in the Nuclear Security 
Fundamentals, specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12  

h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues 
and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear 
security including cyber security at all times. 

A more detailed description of the elements is provided in Recommendations level 
guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 5). 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.3 – Oversight 
of Suppliers, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear Supply Chain Management.  The TAG is 
consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 6) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises. 

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 7) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

This TAG is to be used by inspectors in their assessment of the adequacy of the 
dutyholder’s arrangements for the supply chain management of items or services of 
nuclear security significance. 

The effective procurement of items and services is a fundamental element in the 
provision of an adequate security infrastructure to deliver an appropriate and enduring 
security effect. 

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

6.1 

6.2 

 

 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 3 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

Regulatory Expectations 

6.3 

The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders will describe in the security plan how 
they apply oversight of suppliers of items or services of nuclear security significance to 
support effective nuclear supply chain management arrangements. 

FSyP 4 - Nuclear Supply Chain 
Management 

Oversight of Suppliers of Items or 
Services of Nuclear Security 
Significance 

SyDP 4.3 

Dutyholders should conduct effective oversight and assurance of their supply chain.  

 
The purchaser should establish an effective commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy 
to enable effective delivery of items and/or services. The purchaser’s commercial 
and/or Supply Chain strategy will influence all arrangements associated with the 
procurement security items or services. An effective strategy with appropriate oversight 
and assurance, deployed through the organisation’s business planning process should 
ensure delivery of an effective security solution. 

Oversight arrangements should include measures to review contracts, how 
relationships are managed and performance analysis of vendors. 

There are parties who might wish to substitute counterfeit, fraudulent or suspect items 
for genuine items or services for commercial gain and assurance activities should 
include a focus on the application of processes to prevent such items from entering the 
Supply Chain. Of equal concern is that parties may wish to incorporate a ‘back door’ to 
Operational Technology or Information Technology (OT/IT) to allow subsequent ease 
of access following installation. Dutyholders should be aware that such ‘back doors’ 
can create significant vulnerabilities and give specific consideration to mitigate their 
introduction. There is also the possibility that a party acting maliciously may wish to 
introduce latent defects (for example by installing malware on OT/IT) for subsequent 
exploitation.  Dutyholders and their supply chain should recognise these issues and 
have in place appropriate arrangements to mitigate them. 

6.7 

Assurance activities should ensure appropriate arrangements are in place for all 
contracts involving security classified information or equipment including that 
considered SNI in accordance with FSyP7 and its associated delivery principles. 

7. 

SUPPLY CHAIN OVERSIGHT AND ASSURANCE 

The dutyholder should conduct effective oversight and assurance of the Supply Chain, 
including the acceptance of items or services for work with security significance. 

The dutyholder should establish effective arrangements for the oversight of supplier 
performance throughout the contract period and their quality assurance to ensure that 
items or services will meet the specified intent. The dutyholder should ensure that it 
has sufficient capability to oversee and assure performance throughout the tiers of the 
Supply Chain. Assurance activities should include the inspection, test, release, 
acceptance and storage of security significant items and services. 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

7.1 

7.2 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 4 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

7.3 

7.4 

7.5 

Dutyholders should develop and retain sufficient Intelligent Customer capability to 
specify, conduct oversight and assurance, monitor manufacturing, fabrication and 
testing, and acceptance for technical adequacy of the items or services being 
purchased. 

The dutyholder’s oversight and assurance arrangements should review the supplier’s 
security culture and procedures, during and post contract award to ensure the Supply 
Chain organisations and their leaders continue to understand and promote the 
importance of nuclear security and the contribution of any security significant 
equipment or service they supply, to achieving the requirements of the dutyholder. 

The level of oversight and assurance deployed by the dutyholder should be guided by 
the performance of the supplier or Supply Chain. If performance is below expectation 
then the dutyholder should increase the level of engagement, oversight and assurance 
controls until supplier performance meets expectations or until completion or 
termination of the contract. Conversely, if a supplier demonstrates routine delivery to 
the specified requirements, right first time, every time, the dutyholder may consider a 
change to the method and extent of oversight and assurance as appropriate (i.e. from 
release inspection at the manufacturer’s works to receipt inspection at the purchaser’s 
facility).  

Oversight 

7.6 

The level of oversight deployed by the dutyholder should be commensurate with the 
impact of the item or service if it fails to meet the specified intent. The dutyholder’s 
approach should be influenced by the type of contract, the performance of the supplier, 
their suppliers and the implications to security of poor performance. Dutyholders are 
likely to deploy some or all of the following approaches: 

  Contract Review – Meetings between the supplier and dutyholder should 
review performance and delivery issues including security requirements.  

  Supplier Relationship Management – Used to maintain effective relationships 

between the supplier and dutyholder throughout the contract period to achieve 
common objectives. Effective relationship management should support a 
collaborative approach between the dutyholder and supplier. 

  Vendor Analysis – Performance analysis throughout the contract period with 

data collated on contract success criteria, delivery to correct quality, schedule 
and cost. Vendor analysis may be utilised to target and demonstrate 
improvements, rank and rate suppliers and maintain a dutyholder’s preferred 
suppliers listing. 

  Review of the supplier’s quality assurance arrangements to ensure appropriate 
standards are also applied to their suppliers alongside appropriate testing of 
these items on receipt.  

7.7 

The dutyholder’s Supply Chain oversight arrangements should generate quantitative 
and qualitative performance data to demonstrate that suppliers of security significant 
items or services will meet specified target levels. Dutyholders should instigate 
remedial measures as appropriate, which may include withdrawal of contract, to 
address sub-standard performance that may impact nuclear security. 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 5 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Assurance 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

7.8 

7.9 

7.10 

The dutyholder should have suitable assurance and acceptance processes for items or 
services being supplied or undertaken by others on its behalf. The level of assurance, 
inspection and test deployed upon item or service completion should be 
commensurate with the security significance of the item or service being supplied. 

Acceptance of items or services may include verification or independent assessment 
using second or independent third party organisations. This should be planned and 
executed, in part, by the application of quality plans. This approach provides essential 
levels of assurance which are in addition to that provided through the supplier’s own 
quality arrangements. 

In deciding the levels of assurance, in addition to the security significance of the item 
or service, the dutyholder should consider: the level of assurance normally applied to 
the item or service for its intended use, the code/standard requirements, and the 
difficulty of inspection and testing post-manufacture or installation. It is important that 
ONR has access to all parties that are carrying out quality related activities if 
requested. Access is normally arranged through the dutyholder. This should include 
lower-tier suppliers. 

7.11  The dutyholder’s assurance activities should examine the effectiveness of 

arrangements for the transport, receipt and storage of items or assembly sub-
components within the dutyholder’s facilities prior to delivery from the supplier. The 
storage arrangements should be sufficient to maintain item traceability and prevent 
damage, loss, deterioration, tampering or inadvertent use. 

Inspectors should consider: 

  Do the dutyholder’s oversight and assurance processes allow them control of 
their supply chain management and procurement process arrangements for 
security significant items, from specification of requirement and sourcing a 
supplier including contract award, through to manufacture of item, construction 
of facility or provision of item or service? 

  Does the dutyholder confirm through its oversight and assurance processes 
that its expectations are understood, communicated throughout the Supply 
Chain and routinely reviewed to ensure that suppliers have appropriate 
understanding of the security application and importance of their high 
consequence items or services? 

  Does the dutyholder have sufficient capability to oversee and assess 

performance throughout the Supply Chain, and confirm that the level of 
oversight and assurance deployed by the supplier post contract award is 
commensurate with the risk of the item or service failing to meet the specified 
intent? These QA arrangements for the supply chain may be delivered by the 
principal contractor employed by the dutyholder. 

  Does the dutyholder utilise qualitative and quantitative data to demonstrate 
supplier performance during contract execution and instigate remedial 
measures where appropriate? 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 6 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

 

Is the dutyholder carrying out adequate and appropriate assurance and 
acceptance of items or services being supplied or undertaken by others on its 
behalf? 

  Are any Inspection Agencies used competent to provide third party assurance 

and verification of items or services significant to security? 

  Do the dutyholder’s assurance processes undertake regular reviews of the 

supplier’s quality activities including the release of hold points, with the level of 
evidence to support hold point release defined and tested?  

  Do the dutyholder’s assurance processes undertake regular reviews of 

supplier’s quality activities for Technical Queries (TQs), with a specific focus on 
the aggregation of multiple TQs? 

  Does the dutyholder seek assurance from suppliers that the measures 
introduced to prevent CSFI from entering supply chain are in place and 
effective? 

 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 7 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

REFERENCES 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

8. 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5.  

 
 
6. 

Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036   

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357 

 
7. 
 
 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management 
System. 
 

 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 8 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

9. 

 

 
 

 

CFSI 

CPPNM 

CS&IA 

FSyP 

IAEA 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

SCM 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SyAPs 

SyDP 

TAG 

TQ 

Counterfeit, Fraudulent or Suspect Item 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

Cyber Security and Information Assurance 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation 

Supply Chain Management 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Security Assessment Principles 

Security Delivery Principle 

Technical Assessment Guide 

Technical Query 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 9 of 9 

