Probabilistic Safety Analysis.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ONR GUIDE 

Probabilistic Safety Analysis     

Document Type: 

Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

NS-TAST-GD-030 Revision 6 

Date Issued: 

June 2019 

Review Date: 

June 2022 

Approved by: 

R Moscrop 

Professional Lead Fault Analysis 

Record Reference: 

CM9 2018/408246 

Revision commentary: 

Fit for purpose review with minor and insignificant changes 

 

 
1. 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 

4.  SAPS ADDRESSED AND RELATIONSHIP WITH WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND 

IAEA STANDARDS ............................................................................................................. 3 

5.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ............................................................................................... 14 

6.  REFERENCES (GENERAL) .............................................................................................. 23 

7.  REFERENCES (TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT GUIDES, TAGS) ...................................... 23 

8.  BIBLIOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................ 24 

9.  APPENDIX 1 - NS-TAST-GD-030 – ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS FOR REVIEW OF 

PSAS FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS ......................................................................... 24 

10. APPENDIX 2 – NS-TAST-GD-030 – MAPPING BETWEEN ISSUE O (PROBABILISTIC 

SAFETY ANALYSIS) OF THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND THE 
REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TAG ...................................................................................... 79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 06/19 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 81 

 

 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

INTRODUCTION 

 
 
1. 

1.1 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

2.5 

2.6 

2.7 

2.8 

ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the 
assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may 
be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other dutyholders.  The 
principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist 
ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory 
judgements and decisions.  This technical assessment guide is one of these guides. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

The purpose of this technical assessment guide is to provide an interpretation of those 
Safety Assessment Principles (Ref 6.1) related to PSA and to provide specific 
guidance to inspectors engaged in the assessment of PSAs and PSA related 
submissions (from Licensees, Licence Applicants or Generic Design Assessment 
(GDA) Requesting Parties. All these are referred to as dutyholders in this TAG).  

The “SAPs addressed” section of this TAG concentrates on interpretation of the SAPs; 
general guidance on the assessment of PSA is given in the “Advice to inspectors” 
section. Detailed guidance on the assessment of PSA specific to Nuclear Power Plants 
(NPPs) is provided in Appendix 1.  

As with all guidance, inspectors should use their judgement and discretion in the depth 
and scope to which they apply the guidance provided in this TAG and its Appendix 1.  

This TAG does not provide detailed information on how to judge the technical 
adequacy of the various PSA aspects assessed. The reviewers should use their own 
knowledge and experience for this. However, aid can be sought in the publications 
listed in Sections 5, 6, 7 and in Appendix 1.  

It is not the intention of this guide to prescribe specific methods and approaches for 
conducting PSA. Dutyholders may choose to use alternative methods to those covered 
by this TAG (and in particular its Appendix 1) as long as they lead to equally valid 
outcomes. In cases where the PSA or specific areas of it have been undertaken using 
alternative approaches inspectors should review them on a case-by-case basis and 
judge them on their own merits. External expert support may be sought if necessary. 

In addition, it should be noted that PSA covers a whole range of disciplines and, 
therefore, PSA assessment requires involvement of inspectors with in-depth expertise 
in a range of areas such as fault studies and thermal-hydraulic analysis, mechanical, 
electrical and C&I systems, civil engineering, human factors, software reliability, 
structural integrity, internal and external hazards, severe accident and radiation safety. 
On the other hand, individual assessments of said areas of the safety case can benefit 
from, and should take advantage of, the insights the PSA provides on the relative 
importance of issues addressed in those technical areas. 

Inspectors must be able to form an opinion on whether risks are ALARP and it is not 
unreasonable to expect numerical input to the demonstration that the risk is ALARP. 
NS-TAST-GD-051 (Ref 7.10) provides further guidance on the role of PSA within 
safety cases and NS-TAST-GD-005 (Ref 7.1) provides further guidance on the role of 
PSA in the demonstration of ALARP. 

Although this TAG does not specifically cover PSA for the risk to persons on-site from 
nuclear accidents, it provides sufficient information to help inspectors assessing the 
PSA inputs for this particular aspect of the safety case provided by the dutyholders.  
PSA’s primary focus is usually to assess off-site risks; however PSA may be used to 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 2 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

provide an input to assessment of on-site risk and comparison against Numerical 
Targets 5 and 6.  

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION  

3.1 

3.2 

3.3 

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

The site licence conditions give a legal framework which can be drawn on in 
assessment and are, in general, set out in the form of requiring the licensee to make 
adequate arrangements, in the interests of safety, to secure certain objectives. The 
principal licence conditions (LCs) relevant to PSA are LC14, LC15, LC23, LC24, LC27 
and LC28. 

LC14 requires the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements for the 
production and assessment of safety cases. Normally, the licensee’s safety case will 
need to contain PSA as well as deterministic analysis. 

LC15 sets out the requirements for periodic review and reassessment of safety cases. 
The periodic reviews carried out under these arrangements include those for updating / 
extending the PSA (or producing one, if none previously existing, and comparison with 
relevant good practice) and using it to support the arguments for continuing operation 
during the period until the next review. 

LC23 requires that the safety case identifies the conditions and limits necessary in the 
interest of safety and it is ONR’s expectation that both the probabilistic (PSA) and the 
deterministic aspects of the safety case will contribute to this process. Similarly, ONR 
expects that PSA will contribute to the identification of suitable and sufficient safety 
mechanisms, devices and circuits, as required by LC27 and provide a significant input 
for LC28 in identifying plant that may affect safety for which regular, systematic 
examination, inspection, maintenance and testing will be required.  

LC24 requires the licensee to ensure that all operating instructions which may affect 
safety are written down and include all operating instructions that are necessary in the 
interests of safety.  Thus, ONR expects the PSA to be well documented, wide in scope 
and of high fidelity. 

In addition to these principal licence conditions, LC6 requires that adequate records be 
made and maintained. In this regard, it is ONR’s expectation that licensees will 
establish Living PSA programmes and that, in the framework of these programmes, all 
relevant files and records will be maintained for the life of the facility.  Also, LC 17 sets 
out the requirement for quality assurance (QA) arrangements for all matters that affect 
safety. In this respect Licensees are expected to establish an adequate QA process 
that is effectively applied during all phases of the PSA and its application.   

3.7 

Safety cases, including PSA, may be produced to support activities such as 
construction of new facilities, commissioning, modifications and decommissioning. 
These activities, covered by licence conditions 19, 20, 21, 22 and 35, require safety 
documentation. 

4. 

SAPS ADDRESSED AND RELATIONSHIP WITH WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 
AND IAEA STANDARDS 

4.1 

Introduction 

This  guide  interprets  ONR’s  use  of  the  PSA  related  safety  assessment  principles  as 
set out in ONR’s SAPs (Ref 6.1) FA.1, and FA.10 to FA.14. This guide also addresses 
those  aspects  of  the  principles  on  ‘assurance  of  validity',  AV.1  to  AV.8,  that  are 
specifically  applicable  to  PSA.    Numerical  targets  related  to  PSA  are  explained  more 
fully in annex 2 of the SAPs, and predominantly relate to Targets 7, 8 and 9. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 3 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

4.2 

Fault analysis: general – Design basis analysis, PSA and severe accident analysis – 
FA.1 

“Fault analysis should be carried out comprising suitable and sufficient design 
basis analysis, PSA and severe accident analysis to demonstrate that risks are 
ALARP”  

This  principle  outlines  the  inter-relationship between  the  three  types  of  fault  analysis, 
DBA,  PSA  and  SAA  and  how  in  combination  they  address  the  range  of  potential 
initiating  events  (IEs)  with  nuclear  safety  significance  off  the  site.  As  with  DBA  and 
SAA, the scope of PSA should be suitable and sufficient and used along with the other 
two  fault  analysis  approaches  to  help  demonstrate  that  risks  are  ALARP  and  to 
address SAPs Numerical Targets 7, 8 and 9. 

4.3 

Fault analysis: PSA – Need for a PSA – FA.10 

“Suitable  and  sufficient  PSA  should  be  performed  as  part  of  the  fault  analysis 
and design development and analysis” 

This  principle  sets  the  framework  and  requirements  for  a  PSA  study.  The  overriding 
aim of the  PSA assessment  is to assist  ONR judgements  on the safety of the facility 
and  whether  the  risks  of  its  operation  are  being  made  as  low  as  reasonably 
practicable.  

This  TAG  provides  guidance  which  will  enable  inspectors  to  judge  that  the  above 
expectation for a suitable and sufficient PSA has been met by the dutyholders.  

A PSA should be suitable and sufficient to inform: 

1)  A judgement as to the acceptability of the overall risk of the facility against 
the numerical targets of the SAPs. 

2)    A  judgement  that  a  balanced  design  has  been  achieved,  such  that  no 
particular  class  of  accident  or  feature  of  the  facility  makes  a  disproportionate 
(e.g.,  of  the  order  of  one  tenth  or  greater)  contribution  to  the  risk  target  of 
concern. However, where risk is low (for example below the BSO), it is unlikely 
that further engineering measures would be reasonably practicable to address 
any disproportion. 

3)    That  the  risks  associated  with  the  design  and  operation  of  the  facility,  as 
well as changes in risk associated with any modification to plant or operation, 
are and will remain ALARP. 

The depth of the PSA for a given facility may vary depending on the magnitude of the 
radiological  hazard  and  risks  and  the  complexity  of  the  facility.  For  complex  facilities 
such  as  nuclear  reactors  or  reprocessing  facilities,  comprehensive  PSAs  that  meet 
modern standards should be developed for all types of IEs and all operational modes. 

It is relevant to stress that ONR expects ALARP to be integral to all considerations of a 
facility and site whether new or existing, i.e. it is not a process to be carried out only 
after a design is completed.  

4.4 

Fault analysis: PSA – Validity – FA.11 

“PSA should reflect the current design and operation of the facility or site” 

This principle establishes the need for each aspect of the PSA to be directly related to 
existing  facility  information,  facility documentation  or  the  analysts’  assumptions  in  the 
absence  of  such  information.  The  PSA  should  be  documented  in  such  a  way  as  to 
allow this principle to be met. 

In addition, in order to meet this principle, the PSA should be kept living, i.e. it should 
be updated as necessary to reflect the current design and operational features and to 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 4 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

incorporate  feedback  from  internal  and  external  operational  experience,  improved 
understanding  of  physical  processes  or  accident  progression  and  advances  in 
modelling techniques. 

4.5 

Fault analysis: PSA – Scope and extent – FA.12 

“PSA  should  cover  all  significant  sources  of  radioactivity,  all  permitted 
operating states and all relevant initiating faults” 

In order to meet this principle the scope of the PSA should cover all significant sources 
of  radioactivity  at  the  facility  (e.g.,  fuel  ponds,  fuel  handling  facilities,  waste  storage 
tanks,  radioactive  sources,  reactor  cores,  etc),  all  types  of  IEs  (e.g.,  internal  faults, 
internal  hazards,  external  hazards)  and  all  operational  modes  (e.g.,  nominal  full 
power/throughput,  low  power/throughput,  shutdown,  start-up,  refuelling,  maintenance 
outages).  Where  the  offsite  consequences  are  potentially  significant,  such  as  for  an 
operating power reactor, the PSA should be at least to level 2 and include all external 
events  (including  beyond  design  basis  events  that  could  realistically  lead  to  a 
significant offsite release (see also SAPs para 618).  

4.6 

Fault analysis: PSA – Adequate representation – FA.13 

“The PSA model should provide an adequate representation of the facility and/or 
site” 

1)  General 

The  aim  of  this  principle  is  to  ensure  the  technical  adequacy  of  the  PSA.  Inspectors 
should  be  satisfied  that  the  PSA  has  a  robust  technical  basis  and  thus  provides  a 
credible picture of the contributors to the risk from the facility.  

Starting from the list of IEs from SAP FA.2 (Identification of Initiating Faults), the PSA 
should identify systematically and comprehensively the complete range of sequences 
leading to the “undesired” consequences that may occur. This makes no distinction in 
regard to the frequency at which each sequence is estimated to arise, rather it seeks to 
ensure that all conceivable routes to a release are systematically identified.  

In order to address the relevant numerical targets of the SAPs, the PSA needs to have 
regard  to  accidents  with  severe  consequences  and  to  those  that  have  a  higher 
frequency but lower radiological consequence.   

Where  there  are  multiple  units  or  facilities  on  a  site,  the  PSA  should  consider  all 
significant  sources  of  radioactivity,  including  any  dependencies  or  potential  for 
propagation of IEs or other effects between different units or facilities.  

2)  PSA Models 

PSA  should  account  for  all  contributions  to  the  risk,  including,  but  not  necessarily 
restricted  to:  random  component  individual  failures,  components  which  are  failed  by 
the  IE,  common  cause  failures  (CCFs)  (and,  as  necessary,  other  dependent  and 
consequential  failures),  unavailabilities  due  to  testing  and  maintenance,  pre-initiating 
event  human errors (e.g., misalignments and mis-calibrations), human errors that lead 
to  IEs  and  human  errors  during  the  course  of  the  accident  sequences  (including 
misdiagnosis,  decision  errors,  omission  errors  and  commission  errors).  The  potential 
dependencies  between  separate  human  activities  (either  by  the  same  or  by  different 
operators) should be analysed and reflected in the models and probabilities used.   

The level of detail of PSA should be sufficient to ensure that it is realistic, that the logic 
is correct, that the dependencies are captured, and that the data used is applicable to 
the  boundary  selected  for  each  (basic)  event  in  the  PSA.  Model  simplifications  (e.g., 
modelling  of  bounding  sequences,  use  of  super-components)  and  their  justification 
should  be  clearly  described;  particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  ensuring  that 
dependencies are not missed due to such simplifications. As noted in SAPs para 652, 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 5 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

the  PSA  should  model  events  until  a  safe  stable  state  is  reached  and  justify  the 
mission time accordingly. 

The  frequency  of  occurrence  and  consequences  of  each  of  the  fault  sequences 
identified  should  be  estimated.  Sequences  should  not  be  discounted  solely  on  the 
basis  that  their  individual  frequency  is  low,  since  the  total  contribution  from  all  low 
frequency  sequences  may  be  significant  in  respect  to  the  numerical  targets  of  the 
SAPs. 

Where  groups  are  used  to  represent  several  IEs  or  accident  sequences,  the  group 
should be assigned a frequency equal to the summed frequency of all the contributors 
in the group and should be represented by the most onerous one (i.e. the IE which is 
bounding  in  terms  of  impacts  or  the  sequence  which  is  bounding  in  terms  of 
consequences). Thus, such simplifications are always conservative. Care needs to be 
taken to avoid gross conservatism, since it could affect the conclusions drawn from the 
analysis,  and  could  severely  limit  the  usefulness  of  the  PSA  to  support  decision-
making.  

Best-estimate  methods  and  data  should  be  used  for  the  transient  analyses,  accident 
progression  analyses,  source  term  analyses,  radiological  analysis  and  any  other 
deterministic  analyses  that  support  the  PSA.  Where  no  credible  best  estimate  is 
possible, reasonably conservative assumptions should be made and the sensitivity of 
the  risk  to  these  assumptions  should  be  established.  The  term  “best-estimate”  is 
defined in the SAPs Glossary (Ref 6.1). 

SAP  EDF.14  addresses  deterministic  consideration  of  CCFs  and  discusses  the 
deterministic  expectation  for  modelling  of  CCFs.  Probabilistic  modelling  of  CCFs  is 
expected  to  be  on  a  best-estimate  basis  and  any  claims  on  CCF  in  a  PSA  model 
should  be  credible  and  adequately  justified,  however  additional  regulatory  scrutiny 
should  be  applied  for  CCFs  below  1E-5.  PSA  studies  should  identify  the  relative 
contribution  to  risk  from  the  features  of  the  facility  and  allow  a  judgement  on  the 
balance  of  the  design.  This  is  ideally  achieved  if  each  component  of  the  study  is 
treated  in  a  best  estimate  manner.  If  one  element  of  the  study  contains  a  large 
measure  of  conservatism  and  dominates  the  resulting  risk  calculation,  evaluating  the 
benefit from improving the reliability of that element, or indeed other elements, is more 
difficult. 

Therefore, while the use of conservative design basis analysis within the PSA can be 
justified to show either that the risks are low, or to act as a screening mechanism for 
future  best  estimate  analysis,  risk-informed  decision  making  could  be  severely 
compromised by the use of this type of analysis.  

3)  PSA Data 

Facility specific data should be used, to the extent possible, for the calculation of the 
frequencies and probabilities used in PSA.  

Where  facility  specific  data  is  not  available,  use  of  generic  data  may  be  acceptable 
providing  it  is  shown  to  be  appropriate  to  the  design  and  operating  conditions  of  the 
facility and it relates to a relevant and sufficiently large population. The source of the 
data, the sample size and the uncertainty in the data should be specified. If changes to 
the  source  data  are  made  to  take  account  of  differences  between  the  available  data 
and the plant conditions, these should be justified. 

Where  facility  specific  data  is  not  sufficient  it  should  be  combined  with  applicable 
generic  data  using  a  justified  mathematical  technique,  such  as  Bayesian  update  of 
generic data with facility-specific data (as described, for example, in Refs 6.2 and 6.3). 

Where no relevant statistical data are available, judgements should be made and their 
bases  stated.  Particular  attention  should  be  paid  to  determining  the  sensitivity  of  the 
results of the PSA to such judgements. Ad-hoc judgements not following a robust and 
systematic process should generally attract inspector’s scrutiny.     

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 6 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

When  models  are  used  for  the  calculations  of  probabilities  in  the  PSA,  the 
methodologies used should be justified and should account for all the key influencing 
factors. In particular: 

i.  Probability data for personnel errors should take account of the specific task 
demands, psychological influences (e.g. stress), degree of supervision, level of 
training,  working  practices,  time  available,  physical  environment,  etc,  and  the 
potential  dependencies  between  separate  activities  (either  by  the  same  or  by 
different  operators).  Any  equipment  or  procedural  requirements  to  promote 
reliable human performance should be identified. The best estimate approach 
to  risk  analysis  requires  that  the  beneficial  and  potentially  detrimental 
performance of personnel be represented within the PSA. The factors that can 
influence  the  ability  of  personnel  to  carry  out  activities  need  to  be  carefully 
considered  before  any  quantification  can  take  place.  NS-TAST-GD-063  (Ref 
7.3)  discusses  the  subject  of  Task  Analysis  which  is  judged  a  necessary 
precursor to any quantification. 

ii. The approach selected for the Common Cause Failure (CCF) modelling and 
for  CCF  parameter  estimation  should  be  justified  and  should  be  adequate  to 
represent any level of redundancy present in the specific design of the facility. 
The  consideration  of  coupling  mechanisms  and  facility  specific  defences 
against  CCF  should  be  traceable.  The  applicability  of  the  CCF  data  sources 
used should be demonstrated. 

iii.  The  methodology  used  for  the  calculation  of  probabilities  of  structural 
failures should be justified and the details of the analysis should be transparent. 
If  use  is  made  of  data  from  available  structural  (e.g.  pipework)  failure 
databases, the sources of data and the way in which the data has been used 
should  be  clear  and  the  applicability  of  the  data  should  be  justified.  If  use  is 
made  of  probabilistic  fracture  mechanics  codes,  the  codes  should  be  state  of 
the art and should have been validated against operational experience and/or 
experiments. The range of loads and combinations of loads that could lead to 
the  structural  failures  of  concern  should  be  adequate  to  represent  the 
conditions which are possible for the facility under evaluation.   

iv.  Any  methodologies  used  by  licensees  to  estimate  computer  or  software-
based  system  reliability  for  use  in  PSA  are  expected  to  use  best-estimate 
methods  and  to  consider  uncertainty  and  sensitivity.  These  methodologies 
should meet industry accepted practices and consider the contributions of both 
hardware  and  software  failures.  Estimation  of  software  reliability  should  take 
into  account  influencing  factors  (primarily  systematic)  that  affect  the  quality  of 
the  software  and  are  informed  by  the  specification  and  design  of  the  system 
(e.g.  considering  the  reliability  targets  for  system  design  based  on  safety 
integrity  levels  in  IEC  61508  or  equivalent).  Any  dependencies  introduced  by 
the systematic nature of software failure(s) should be accounted for accordingly 
in  the  PSA.  If  software  elements  of  a  computer  based  system  (e.g.  operating 
systems,  application  software  supporting  different  functions)  have  been 
individually modelled in the PSA, the dependencies between the various parts 
should be addressed explicitly. Any self-checking or diagnostic functions built in 
the  computer  based  system  should  be  taken  into  account  in  an  adequate 
manner  (e.g.  considering  the  dependencies  between  these  functions  and  the 
primary safety functions delivered by the system). The dependencies between 
two  (or  more)  computer  based  systems  should  be  dealt  with  explicitly.  NS-
TAST-GD-046 (Ref 7.8) and IAEA report NP-T-3.27 (Ref 8.4) provide additional 
guidance on the assessment of reliability for a computer based system. 

v. Assumptions on reliability of passive features or passive systems should be 
substantiated by suitable analysis covering the full range of accident conditions 
for which they are required and by extensive tests.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 7 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

vi.  Analyses  to  estimate  the  probability  of  occurrence  of  phenomena  (for 
example  in  the  severe  accident  portion  of  the  PSA)  should be  performed  in  a 
systematic  and  transparent  manner  taking  account  of  up-to-date  information 
from an appropriate range of sources about the phenomena.  

4)  PSA Results 

The  results  of  the  PSA  should  be  comprehensively  documented  and  properly 
interpreted.  The  numerical  results  of  the  PSA  should  always  be  presented  together 
with  list/s  of  minimal  cutsets  and  the  list  of  basic  events  and  associated  importance 
measures  (as  a  minimum  Fractional  Contributions  or  Fussell  Vesely  Importance  and 
Risk  Increase  factors  or  Risk  Achievement  Worth).  It  should  be  noted  that  the 
importance measures, in themselves, represent sensitivities of the results of the PSA 
to the inputs and, therefore, the dutyholders should provide justification of whether any 
high  values  shown  are  acceptable  and  nothing  reasonable  can  be  done  to  reduce 
unduly high risk contributions.  

In all aspects of the analysis where assumptions have been made including those on 
how  the  plant  and  the  operating  staff  behave,  these  and  their  justification  should  be 
clearly described. The sensitivity of the results of the PSA to changes in assumptions 
should be evaluated and clearly documented.  

Uncertainty  on  input  probability  and  frequency  values  should  be  estimated  and 
propagated  through  the  models  to  generate  uncertainty  distributions  on  the  resulting 
frequencies  or  probabilities  of  undesired  events.  The  means  of  these  distributions 
should be compared against the numerical targets in the SAPs.  

Based  on  the  importance,  sensitivity  and  uncertainty  evaluations,  the  dutyholder 
should  gain  an  understanding  of  which  parametric  and  modelling  uncertainties 
contribute  most  to  the  overall  uncertainty  in  the  probabilities  or  frequencies  of 
undesired events and should, subject to reasonable practicability, take steps to reduce 
such uncertainties.  

Ultimately,  the  results  of  the  uncertainty  and  sensitivity  evaluations  should  provide 
confidence that the overall conclusions obtained from the PSA are still valid. 

“PSA  should  be  used  to  inform  the  design  process  and  help  ensure  the  safe 
operation of the site and its facilities” 

The aim of this principle is to establish the expectations on what uses the dutyholders 
should  make  of  the  PSA  to  support  decision-making  and  on  how  the  supporting 
analyses should be undertaken. 

1)  Uses of PSA  

The  PSA  should  provide  information  for,  and  receive  information  from,  the  facility 
designers  and  operators  so  that  consistency  is  achieved  between  the  PSA  and  the 
design and operation of the facility. Following such an approach allows the PSA to be 
a powerful tool to aid decision making. Inspectors should expect the PSA to provide an 
input to the following: 

i.  Initial  design,  design  development  and  design  modifications  and  back-fits 
during  the  life  of  the  facility.  ONR  expects  the  PSA  to  be  integrated  into  the 
design  process  in  an  iterative  manner,  i.e.  the  PSA  should  be  used  in  all  the 
stages of the design. 

ii.  Support  to  the  safety  classification  of  structures,  systems  and  components 
(SSCs). ONR expects PSA to inform the safety classification of SSCs through 
consideration  of 
importance 
measures.  

for  example  system  reliabilities  and  PSA 

4.7 

Fault analysis: PSA – Use of PSA – FA.14 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 8 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

iii. Development of, and changes to, operating limits and conditions and testing, 
inspection and maintenance schedules of the facility. 

iv.  Testing,  inspection  and  maintenance  planning  and  daily  management  of 
plant configuration.  

v. Periodic system reviews and overall periodic safety review of the facility.  

vi. Justification for any change to the way in which the facility is operated.  

vii.  Development  of,  and  changes  to,  operating  procedures  for  managing  all 
stages of incidents and accidents, including severe accidents. 

viii. Design of, and changes to, operator-training programmes for management 
of incidents and accidents, including severe accidents. 

ix. Off-site emergency planning and response including a demonstration of the 
effectiveness of countermeasures. 

x. Evaluation of the risk significance of the abnormal occurrences at the facility 
and identification of measures to avoid future recurrences of safety significant 
events. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  PSA  can  and  should  provide  valuable  information  to 
ONR inspectors in the following (see Ref 6.6): 

a.  Understanding  the  safety  significance  of  the  issues  under  consideration  by 
the Office for Nuclear Regulation, e.g. modifications being assessed or events 
under investigation.  

b.  Focusing  inspection  activities  on  those  areas  (systems,  components, 
features, etc.) with the highest safety significance. 

c. Understanding the safety significance of inspection findings.  

d.  Assisting  in  forming  a  judgement  towards  the  adequacy  of  licensees’ 
demonstration of meeting SAP Numerical Targets 5 and 6. 

2)  Technical adequacy of PSA applications  

For  the  PSA  to  be  an  effective  tool  to  support  decision  making,  not  only  should  the 
quality of the PSA be adequate (in line with SAP FA.13) but also the way in which the 
PSA is used should be appropriate, i.e. PSA studies performed to support any safety 
submission, including the justification of any modification to plant or operation, should 
be comprehensive, technically sound and properly documented. In this regard: 

i.  Any issue that is going to be evaluated using PSA (e.g. a facility design or 
operational feature, a proposed change to the design, or an event at the facility) 
should be explicitly defined together with the type of results required as input to 
the decision-making, including any numerical criteria that need to be met.  

ii. All aspects of the PSA model and data potentially affected by the issue under 
study should be identified, evaluated for impact and modified if necessary. 

iii.  All  the  assumptions  should  be  checked  for  validity  against  the  issue  under 
study and modified if appropriate. 

iv.  Sensitivity analyses should be carried out to estimate the sensitivity of the 
risk to changes in relevant assumptions and areas of modelling uncertainty, to 
check the risk impact of different options under consideration and to carry out 
‘what  if’  analyses  if  appropriate.  The  results  of  the  sensitivity  analyses  should 
be used to inform the decision-making process.   

v. Uncertainty analyses should be carried out  

vi.  Based  on  the  results  of  the  sensitivity  and  uncertainty  analyses,  the 
dutyholder  should  show  that  the  most  important  modelling  and  parametric 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 9 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

uncertainties have been minimised, or that the results of the application are not 
affected by these uncertainties, or that the decision based on the results of the 
application  takes  account  of  the  uncertainties  by  adopting  the  precautionary 
principle (as described  in paragraphs 89 and the following  ones of R2P2,  Ref 
6.5). 

vii.  The  issue  under  study  could  potentially  affect  aspects  of  the  risk  not 
covered  within  the  scope  of  the existing  PSA.  These limitations  in  the  PSA  in 
relation  to  the  issue  under  evaluation  should  be  recognised  and  identified 
explicitly.  In  order  to  perform  a  comprehensive  risk  analysis  the  PSA  models 
should be extended and/or enhanced to cover the missing aspects. If this is not 
practicable  (e.g.  due  to  time  constraints),  the  risk  impact  of  the  issue 
associated  with  areas  outside  the  scope  of  the  existing  PSA  should  be 
analysed qualitatively.   

viii.  The  outcome  of  the  PSA  studies  performed  to  evaluate  issues  should  be 
clear,  comprehensive  and  traceable  and  should  provide  recommendations 
based  on  a  systematic  application  of  decision-making  criteria  applied  to  the 
results of the PSA evaluations.  

4.8 

Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Theoretical models – AV.1 

“Theoretical models should adequately represent the facility and site” 

Theoretical  models  are  used  throughout  the  PSA,  e.g.,  reliability  models  (including 
CCF and human reliability models), models for the evaluation of the thermal-hydraulic 
or  chemical  behaviour,  the  progression  of  the  accident  and  the  transport  of  fission 
products,  models  for  the  analysis  of  structural  integrity  of  containment  and  any  other 
structures,  models  for  the  evaluation  of  the  impact  of  the  various  isotopes  on  human 
health, etc.  

SAP AV.1 is strongly linked to AV.2 discussed below and together aim to ensure that 
all the calculations that underlay the PSA are adequate to represent the facility. In this 
respect, these SAPs reinforce specific PSA SAPs FA.11 and FA.13 above.  

4.9 

Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Calculation methods – AV.2 

“Calculation  methods  used  for  the  analyses  should  adequately  represent  the 
physical and chemical processes taking place” 

Calculation  methods  are  used  in  support  of  various  tasks  in  PSA,  e.g.  thermal-
hydraulic  analyses,  analyses  of  chemical  behaviour,  accident  progression  analyses, 
analysis of structural integrity of containment and any other structures, fission product 
release  and  transport,  analysis  of  health  effects,  etc.  PSA  software,  in  itself,  uses  a 
calculation algorithm to quantify the PSA models and to obtain the list of cutsets. The 
aim  of  this  principle  is  to  ensure  that  all  the  calculation  methods  used  in  the  PSA 
adequately  represent  the  real  processes  taking  place  in  the  facility  and  that  the 
calculations are done as intended by the analysts.  

For  this,  inspectors  should  satisfy  themselves  that  the  calculation  algorithms  have 
been validated with actual experience, experiments, tests or other calculation methods. 
Inspectors  should  also  seek  evidence  that  uncertainties  in  the  calculation  methods 
used  have  been  recognised  by  the  dutyholder  and  that  methods  have  only  been 
applied within their limit of applicability. As deemed appropriate, inspectors may wish to 
consider undertaking (or commissioning) independent calculations for some aspects of 
the  PSA  (e.g.,  addressing  areas  of  particular  concern)  using  different  calculation 
methods.  This  is  particularly  important  if  the  PSA  is  being  used  to  support  a  new 
design. TAG NS-TAST-GD-042 (Ref 7.7) should be referred to for further guidance. 

4.10  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Use of data – AV.3 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 10 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

“The  data  used  in  the  analysis  of  aspects  of  plant  performance  with  safety 
significance should be shown to be valid for the circumstances by reference to 
established physical data, experiment or other appropriate means” 

Failure rate and probability data is the basis of the PSA; therefore, for the PSA to be an 
adequate  representation  of  the  facility,  it  should  make  use  of  data  that  can  be 
demonstrated to be valid for the facility. The use of data in PSA has been discussed in 
Section  4.6  (3)  above.  Section  4.6  (4)  has  also  discussed  the  need  to  evaluate  the 
uncertainty in the input data and its impact on the overall PSA results. Section 4.7 (2) 
has  addressed  how  to  interpret  this  uncertainty  in  decision-making.  Therefore,  this 
SAP is viewed as a reinforcement of specific PSA SAPs FA.13 and FA.14.  

Data  about  physical  processes  is also an  input  to  PSA supporting  calculations.  Such 
data should be justified by reference to physical data, experiment or other appropriate 
means. See also 4.11. 

4.11  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Computer models – AV.4 

“Computer  models  and  datasets  used  in  support  of  the  safety  analysis  should 
be  developed,  maintained  and  applied  in  accordance  with  quality  management 
procedures” 

Computer models are developed to support various tasks in PSA, e.g. for derivation of 
success criteria, accident progression analyses, fission product release and transport, 
analysis  of  structural  integrity  of  containment  and  any  other  structures,  etc.  The  PSA 
itself  comprises  a  computer  model  and  an  associated  database.  Therefore,  the 
relevance of this SAP cannot be stressed enough. The aim of this principle is to ensure 
that  all  the  calculations  that  underlay  the  PSA  are  undertaken  without  error.  For  this, 
inspectors  may  wish  to  satisfy  themselves  that  the  dutyholders  have  put  in  place 
adequate procedures to develop, maintain and apply computer models and databases.  

These  procedures  should  cover  verification,  validation  or  qualification  of  computer 
codes,  as  appropriate,  for  the  specific  design  of  the  facility.  The  procedures  should 
also  require  the  dutyholder  to  identify  the  degree  of  accuracy  and  uncertainties 
associated  with  the  selected  computer  codes  and  to  ensure  that  the  codes  are  only 
used within their limit of applicability and by adequately trained users. In addition, the 
procedures  should  require  the  dutyholder  to  ensure  that  the  modelling  of  the  plant 
inputted as underlying basis for the calculations and the input data files are auditable 
and  are  verified.  Inspectors  may  choose  to  review  or  audit  these  procedures  and/or 
seek evidence of their correct application by the dutyholder. 

Generally inspectors should expect that the Quality Assurance process applied to the 
PSA covers all items identified in SAP AV.4.  Further guidance on the use of computer 
models in safety cases is provided in NS-TAST-GD-042 (Ref 7.7). 

4.12  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Documentation – AV.5 

“Documentation  should  be  provided  to  facilitate  review  of  the  adequacy  of  the 
analytical models and data” 

PSAs  are  generally  large  and  complex  safety  analyses.  Therefore,  for  them  to  be 
traceable, reproducible, verifiable and updatable, they need to be documented in such 
a  way  as  to  ensure  that  each  aspect  of  the  PSA  can  be  directly  related  to  existing 
facility information, facility documentation or the analysts’ assumptions in the absence 
of  such  information.  In  this  respect  this  SAP  reinforces  PSA-specific  SAP  FA.11 
(Validity) addressed above. 

Good practice on PSA documentation can be found in IAEA TECDOC on Living PSA 
(Ref 6.4). This report recommends that, as part of the PSA documentation, individual 
Task  Procedures  should  be  developed  to  ensure  that  all  analysts  working  on  a  task 
develop  a  consistent  set  of  models  which  interface  without  overlap  or  omission. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 11 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Inspectors  may  choose  to  review  or  audit  these  procedures,  if  available,  to  gain 
confidence on the consistent application of methods throughout the PSA.  

Ref  6.4  also  recommends  that  for  each  PSA  task,  analysis  files  should  be  compiled 
including  relevant  reports,  input  data,  relevant  calculations,  and  model  or  database 
files  containing  task  results.  The  PSA  task  reports:  should  describe  the  analyses 
performed  and  all  the  modelling  assumptions;  should  identify  interfaces  with  other 
tasks; and should list all the references used. These analysis files should be controlled 
documents  which  are  maintained  for  the  life  of  the  facility.  They  enable  any  PSA 
analyst familiar with the particular task to recreate, modify or review the particular part 
of the PSA. Experience with large PSA models suggest that unless there is a complete 
set  of  such  files,  it  is  very  difficult  to  define  and  understand  each  element  of  the 
computer model and the results of its quantification. 

4.13  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Sensitivity analyses – AV.6 

“Studies should be carried out to determine the sensitivity of the analysis (and 
the conclusions drawn from it) to the assumptions made, the data used and the 
methods of calculation”  

Sensitivity analyses are a key aspect of the PSA because they are needed to provide 
confidence  that  the  conclusions  obtained  from  the  PSA  are  valid  despite  the 
uncertainties  associated  with  the  supporting  analysis  and  assumptions  used  in  the 
development of the PSA. If the sensitivity analyses performed do not provide sufficient 
confidence in the validity of the conclusions of the PSA, reasonably practicable steps 
need to be taken to reduce the uncertainties associated with the model and data – this 
may include use of independent methods and computer codes, where appropriate, as 
indicated in the text accompanying SAP AV.6.  

Sensitivity  analyses  have  been  addressed  in  Section  4.6  (4).  In  addition,  Section  4.7 
(2)  discusses  the  role  of  sensitivity  analyses  when  using  PSA  to  support  decision-
making. Therefore, this SAP reinforces specific PSA SAPs FA.13 and FA.14.  

4.14  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Data collection – AV.7 

“Data should be collected throughout the operating life of the facility to check or 
update the safety analysis” 

The  validity  and  applicability  of  the  IE  frequencies,  component  failure  probabilities, 
unavailabilities,  etc,  used  in  the  PSA  can  only  be  assured  if  these  are  reviewed 
periodically using facility specific information.  

Therefore, it is reasonable to expect dutyholders to put systems in place for collecting 
relevant data throughout the life of the facility and to use this data every time the PSA 
is updated as required e.g. by PSA SAP FA.11 (above) and Assurance of Validity SAP 
AV.8 (below). 

4.15  Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Update and review – AV.8 

“The  safety  analysis  should  be  updated  where  necessary  and  reviewed 
periodically” 

Licence Condition 15 requires the licensees to conduct periodic reviews of the safety 
cases for their facilities. These periodic safety reviews (PSRs) are normally carried out 
every ten years. However a licensee's arrangements under LC15 should also require 
interim  reviews  on  a  shorter  term  basis  taking  into  account  the  number  and  safety 
significance of modifications to the facility and/or changes to the safety case since the 
previous review (See NS-TAST-GD-050, Ref 7.9).  

AV.8 should also be interpreted as highlighting the principle of Living PSA, in that ONR 
expects  PSAs  to  be  living  analyses  that  constantly  reflect  the  best  estimate  of  the 
dutyholder on the reliability of components, plant availability etc, current knowledge on 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 12 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

plant behaviour, and modern analysis methods. In this regard, this principle reinforces 
the specific PSA principle FA.11 discussed above.  

It  is  expected  that  review  by  the  facility  operators  will  identify  if  operating  experience 
has proved to be significantly different from the assumptions in the analyses and then 
take action to ensure that risks remain ALARP. 

The  frequency  at  which  an  updating  or  reconsideration  of  the  PSA  should  be  carried 
out will depend upon a number of factors, e.g. related to the systems that are in place 
to  collect  and  analyse  data  and  to  the  understanding  of  ageing  effect  and  trends  in 
system  reliability.  Dutyholders  are  expected  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  modifications 
(design,  procedures,  operating  practices,  etc.)  on  the  PSA  results  on  a case-by-case 
basis. Some modifications may therefore require the PSA to be immediately updated. 
IAEA TECDOC on Living PSA (Ref 6.4) indicates that it is a good practice at operating 
NPPs not to accumulate a backlog of such evaluations for a period longer than a year. 
It  also  suggests  that,  even  if  risk-significant  modifications  do  not  arise  for  a  longer 
period,  the  dutyholder  should  still  revise,  update  and  formally  amend  the  PSA  every 
three years.  

4.16  Target 7: Individual risk to people off the site from accidents 

“The targets for the individual risk of death to a person off the site, from 
accidents at the site resulting in exposure to ionising radiation, are: 

BSL:  1 x 10-4 pa 

BSO:  1 x 10-6 pa” 

Target 7 address accident risks to the public, summed for all facilities on a site. 

4.17  Target 8: Frequency dose targets for accidents on an individual facility – any person off 

the site 

“The targets for the total predicted frequencies of accidents on an individual 
facility, which could give doses to a person off the site are: 

Effective dose, mSv  

Total predicted frequency per annum 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.1-1 

1-10 

 

 

 

10-100  

100-1000 

>1000   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BSL 

1 

 

 

BSO 

1 x 10-2 

1 x 10-1 

1 x 10-3 

1 x 10-2  

1 x 10-4 

1 x 10-3 

1 x 10-5 

1 x 10-4 

1 x 10-6” 

Target 8 sets limits on the frequencies of classes of accidents at individual facilities 
that could give rise to doses off the site within the specified bands. 

4.18  Target 9: Total risk of 100 or more fatalities 

“The targets for the total risk of 100 or more fatalities, either immediate or 
eventual, from accidents at the site in exposure to ionising radiation, are: 

BSL: 

 

BSO:   

1 x 10-5 pa 

1 x 10-7 pa” 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 13 of 81 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Target 9 is intended to be used as a guide to assist in judging whether more detailed 
analysis is warranted. As with other numerical targets, Target 9 is a pragmatic 
approach to enable targeted and proportionate use of resources.  ALARP 
considerations by dutyholders below the BSO should, however, not be ruled out.  

4.19  Relationship with the WENRA Reference Levels 

The  Reactor  Harmonization  Working  Group  of  the  Western  European  Nuclear 
Regulators  Association  (WENRA)  published  Reactor  Safety  Reference  Levels  in 
January  2007  and  revised  versions  in  January  2008  and  most  recently  September 
2014. Issue O of this document refers to Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA). This TAG 
is  consistent  with  Issue  O  of  the  WENRA  reference  levels.  Appendix  2  presents  the 
mapping between Issue O of the WENRA reference levels and this TAG. 

4.20  Relationship with the IAEA Standards 

Key relevant IAEA publications on PSA are listed in Sections 6, 8, A1-4 and A1-5. The 
contents of this TAG, including its Appendix 1, are broadly consistent with those IAEA 
publications. In particular, Refs [6.4, A1-5.6 and A1-5.10] and the IAEA Specific Safety 
Guides on Level 1 and Level 2 PSA, Refs [A1-5.7 and A1-5.8] have been specifically 
used for the preparation of Appendix 1 of the TAG. 

5. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

5.1 

Introduction 

This section of the TAG aims to provide guidance on the assessment of a PSA which 
generally  is  associated  with  SAPs  FA.10  to  FA.14.  The  guidance  in  this  section  is 
presented in the order of a typical PSA as this is likely to be of more practical value to 
the inspectors.  

This section is split up into a number of parts dealing with the different elements of a 
PSA.  Each  part  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  specific  points  of  guidance  to  ONR 
inspectors. It should be noted that all of these points need not be met fully in each and 
every instance. It is left to the judgement of the individual inspector to identify both the 
scope of assessment and which, if any, of the shortfalls are significant. 

The  guidance  provided  in  this  section  is  generally  applicable  to  the  assessment  of 
PSAs  for  all  types  of  nuclear  facilities.  However,  more  specific  and  detailed 
assessment expectations for review of PSAs for NPPs are given in Appendix 1 to this 
TAG. Since much of the guidance provided in Appendix 1 can also be applied to other 
types  of  facilities,  inspectors  may  wish  to  use  Appendix  1  at  their  discretion  for  the 
assessment of PSAs for facilities other than NPPs. 

1)  PSA should be a systematic analysis to identify all important fault sequences which 
can lead to radiological consequences and to evaluate their contribution to the level of 
risk  represented  by  the  facility.  The  PSA  should  set  out  to  identify  all  the  significant 
contributions to the estimate of the level of risk otherwise the analysis is not complete 
and conclusions drawn from the analysis may thus be incorrect. 

2)  The same expectation of scope for PSAs is, in principle, applicable to both old and 
new facilities. However, the methods and details of analysis that licensees choose to 
use to demonstrate that the level of risk from their facility is ALARP may be different. 

3)  The inspector may consider: 

i.  in  cases  where  there  is  currently  no  PSA,  whether  producing  one  would  be 
worthwhile; 

5.2 

PSA Scope 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 14 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ii.  in  cases  where  there  is  a  PSA,  whether  the  objectives  of  the  analysis  are 
appropriate and its scope adequate to meet them; 

iii. whether the scope of the PSA covers all the sources of radioactivity on the 
facility; 

iv. whether the scope of the PSA allows a meaningful comparison to be made 
with the numerical targets of the SAPs; 

v. whether the scope of the PSA covers all classes of IEs and hazards; 

vi. whether the scope of the PSA covers all foreseeable operating modes of the 
facility; 

vii.  whether  any  reductions  in  scope  of  the  PSA  from  the  above  pointers  are 
identified; 

viii.  whether,  where  the  scope  of  the  PSA  has  been  reduced,  a  justification  is 
provided to confirm that this would not change the conclusions of the PSA; 

ix.   in the case of a site with multiple reactors or facilities, whether the scope of 
the PSA is well defined (e.g. for a single representative unit, or multiple units or 
facilities),  and  whether  the  justification  for  scope  is  provided  and  adequate 
(additional discussion on multi-unit considerations is contained in Section 5.13). 

4)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the scope of the PSA for NPPs can 
be found in Table A1-1.2 (PSA Scope) of Appendix 1. 

5.3 

PSA Methodology 

1)  The starting point for the PSA is a detailed description of the design and operation 
of  the  facility  and  its  associated  protection  system,  and  their  behaviour  in  fault 
conditions. This would typically include facility descriptions, fault schedules, drawings, 
operating  instructions,  safety  reports  and  transient,  radiological  and  any  other 
deterministic analyses that support the PSA. 

2)  The inspector may consider whether: 

i. the detailed design of the facility and its equipment to which the PSA refers is 
identified; 

ii.  sufficient  information  is  provided  on  the  design  and  operation  of  the  facility 
and  on  its  behaviour  in  fault  conditions  to  support  the  PSA.  (The  inspector 
should consider carrying out a site visit(s) to confirm a selection of design and 
operating assumptions used in the PSA); 

iii.  the  methods  of  analysis  used  in  the  PSA  are  defined  and  are  suitable  to 
meet the objectives of the analysis; 

iv. the PSA has been fully documented; 

v. the PSA has been carried out in accordance with written QA procedures; 

vi.  the  PSA  has  undergone  an  independent  assessment/peer  review  and  the 
findings are acceptable. 

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy of the documentation 
provided in support of each technical task of the PSAs for NPPs can be found in the 
various Tables of Appendix 1. 

5.4 

Derivation of Initiating Events Including Hazards 

1)   A list should be included providing identification of all of the identifiable IEs within 
the scope of the PSA which could lead directly or in combination with other failures to a 
release of radioactive material. 

2)  The inspector may consider whether: 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 15 of 81 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

i. the list of IEs covers all the sources of radioactive material in the facility; 

ii.  the  quantity,  form  and  location  of  all  radioactive  material  in  the  facility  is 
identified; 

iii.  if  any  sources  of  radioactive  material  are  not  included  in  the  PSA, 
justification is given that this would not lead to a significant contribution to the 
risk; 

iv. the list of IEs covers all the operating modes of the facility; 

v.  if  any  operating  mode  is  not  covered  in  the  list  of  IEs,  justification  is  given 
that the contribution to the risk is small during this operating mode; 

vi.  the  IE  identification  process  is  shown  to  be  comprehensive  so  that  all 
possible IEs are identified; 

vii. the list of IEs includes partial failures as well as total failure; 

viii. all relevant internal hazards are listed; 

ix. all relevant external hazards are listed; 

x. each IE  is defined; 

xi. the causes of each IE are identified; 

xii.  features  such  as  administrative  systems,  control  systems,  interlocks  etc. 
which limit the frequency of an IE are identified; 

xiii. failures of protection system equipment which can occur as a consequence 
of an IE are identified; 

xiv. a list is prepared of IEs which are screened from the list of IEs because of 
very low frequency or "incredibility", with reference to the justification; 

xv. full records of the IE identification process are available and are of suitable 
quality; 

xvi. any IE screening criteria adopted are clearly described and justified. 

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy and completeness of 
the  list  of  IEs  considered  in  the  PSAs  for  NPPs  can  be  found  in  Tables  A1-2.1 
(identification and grouping of  initiating events), A1-2.7 (analysis of hazards) and A1-
2.8 (low power and shutdown modes) of Appendix 1. 

5.5 

Protection and Mitigation Systems 

1)  The PSA should identify the safety systems which are required to operate for each 
of the IEs and identify the success criteria for each of the safety functions. 

2)  The inspector may consider whether for each IE:  

i. the safety functions have been identified; 

ii.  the  minimum  safety  systems  requirements  to  achieve  the  safety  functions 
have been identified; 

iii.  the  minimum  protection  system  requirements  are  consistent  with  any 
deterministic / transient analysis presented; 

iv. for automatic protection actions, the parameters and systems used to initiate 
the action have been identified; 

v.    for  manually  initiated  protection  actions,  the  alarms  and  indications  which 
would alert the operator to the need for the action are identified. 

3)    Specific  assessment  expectations  for  review  of  the  adequacy  of  the  credited 
safeguards  in  PSAs  for  NPPs  can  be  found  in  Table  A1-2.2  (Accident  sequence 
development: determination of success criteria) of Appendix 1. 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 16 of 81 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.6 

Accident Sequence Analysis 

1)    The  next  stage  of  the  PSA  is  the  accident  sequence  analysis  which  models  the 
behaviour  of  the  facility  for  the  IEs.  The  analysis  should  cover  all  possible 
combinations  of  success  or  failure  of  the  protection  systems  to  perform  the  safety 
functions and should identify the accident sequences which involve failure to maintain 
the facility within safe limits. 

2)  The end points of the accident sequence analysis should be categorised in terms 
compatible  with  the  numerical  targets  of  the  SAPs  addressed.  This  does  not 
necessarily mean that the categories defined by the dutyholders have to be identical to 
those  corresponding  to  the  numerical  targets  of  the  SAPs.  However,  safety  cases 
should be presented in a manner which allows inspectors to make judgements against 
the SAPs’ targets. The inspector may check that, for each IE: 

i.  the  accident  sequence  analysis  covers  all  the  safety  functions  required  and 
all  the  combinations  of  protection  system  equipment  which  can  operate  to 
perform the safety functions; 

ii.  the  accident  sequence  analysis  takes  account  of  all  the  functional 
dependencies between safety functions and protection systems; 

iii. the accident sequence analysis covers all the mechanisms which could lead 
to  failure  of  the  physical  barriers  such  as  a  reactor  pressure  vessel  or  the 
containment; 

iv. the accident sequence analysis covers the factors which  affect the release 
and  transport  of  radioactive  materials  to  the  environment  and  their  effects  on 
humans; 

v. sufficient radiological analysis is available to justify the categorisation of the 
end-points  of 
that  best-estimate 
assumptions have been made; 

the  accident  sequence  analysis  or 

vi.  the  transient,  radiological  and  other  deterministic  analyses  used  to  support 
the PSA models do not contain undue pessimisms (these should preferably be 
best estimate); 

vii.  where  IEs  are  grouped,  the  frequency  is  the  sum  of  the  individual  IEs 
grouped and the group is represented by the most onerous one. 

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy of the grouping of IEs 
in  PSAs  for  NPPs  can  be  found  in  Table  A1-2.1  of  Appendix  1.  Specific  assessment 
expectations  for  review  of  the  accident  sequence  analysis  in  PSAs  for  NPPs  can  be 
found in Table A1-2.3 of Appendix 1. 

5.7 

Protection and Mitigation Systems Failure Analysis 

1)  The accident sequence analysis identifies combinations of IEs and failures of safety 
systems  and  then  considers  the  failures  of  these  systems  down  to  a  lower  level  to 
identify the combinations of basic events within the various safety systems or support 
systems  which  could  lead  to  the  failure.  The  basic  events  would  typically  include; 
component  failure,  CCF,  component  unavailability  during  maintenance  or  test  and 
operator error. 

2)    The  most  usual  method  of  safety  system  analysis  is  fault  tree  analysis;  other 
techniques are acceptable but may need additional scrutiny. 

3)  The inspector may consider whether: 

i.  the  systems  failure  analysis  covers  all  the  failure  states  identified  by  the 
accident sequence analysis; 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 17 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ii.  the  analysis  has  been  carried  out  to  a  low  enough  level  of  detail  (e.g. 
individual  component  level)  so  that  the  design  and  operation  of  the  system  is 
adequately modelled; 

iii.  all  the  relevant  failure  modes  of  protection  system  equipment  have  been 
included; 

iv.  where  components  have  been  grouped  together  in  the  analysis  (e.g.  in 
“super-components”), failure of each of the components in the mode specified 
has the same effect on the system and justification is clearly documented; 

v. the systems failure analysis models all the support systems required and that 
all interdependencies due to common services have been represented; 

vi.  the  systems  failure  analysis  takes  account  of  consequential  failures  which 
could occur due to the IE or hazard; 

vii.  CCFs  are  included  in  the  models  at  an  appropriate  level  and  that  the 
probability given to each CCF has been derived on a best-estimate basis;   

viii. all operator errors which can contribute to the failure of a system credited in 
the  PSA  have  been  identified  and  modelled  in  the  analysis,  with  due 
consideration of dependencies; 

ix. the unavailability of components, trains of systems or the entirety of systems 
during periods of maintenance or testing has been addressed in the analysis. 

4)    Specific  assessment  expectations  for  review  of  the  System  Analysis  in  PSAs  for 
NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.4 of Appendix 1. 

5.8 

PSA Input Data 

1)  Data is required to estimate the frequencies and probabilities in the PSA. 

2)  The inspector may consider whether: 

i.  data  is  provided  for  all  the  basic  events  and  IE  frequencies  included  in  the 
PSA; 

ii.  the  data  provided  is  preferably  best  estimate  and  appropriate  for  the  use 
made of it in the PSA; 

iii.  where  use  is  made  of  operating  experience  data  in  calculating  IE 
frequencies  and  component  failure  rates,  and  the  event  is  a  potentially 
important  contributor  to  the  risk,  there  is  an  adequate  discussion  of  the 
relevance of the data and the statistical uncertainty; 

iv.  where  insufficient  directly  relevant  data  are  available,  the  source  of  any 
quoted generic data and the basis of any judgements are stated; 

v. for IE frequencies: 

a. the data covers all the causes of the IEs which have been identified; 

b. where the IE frequency has been calculated from failure data for the 
causes  of  the  fault,  the  data  is  applicable  for  this  use  and  has  been 
combined correctly to derive the frequency; 

c.  where  no  relevant  operating  data  is  available  and  judgement  has 
been used to assign the IE frequency, the basis for this judgement has 
been stated and shown to be valid, as far as possible; 

vi.  for component failure rates (or probabilities): 

a. the boundaries of the component for which the data is specified are 
defined; 

b. the data covers all relevant failure modes of the component; 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 18 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

c.  the  data  used  corresponds  to  the  component  in  terms  of  type, 
manufacture, operating environment, usage and maintenance regime; 

d. the form of the data is suitable - that is, a failure rate per unit time or 
a  failure  probability  per  demand  is  given  as  appropriate  for  running  or 
standby components; 

e. where a test interval is used to change a failure rate per unit time to a 
failure  probability  per  demand,  there  should  be  a  reference  to  the 
relevant testing schedule and procedures; 

f.  where  a  component  is  required  to  operate  continuously  after  a  fault, 
the required period of operation is defined and justified by reference to 
the supporting deterministic analysis; 

vii. for component unavailabilities: 

a. the data covers all causes of component unavailability including tests 
(scheduled  and  unscheduled),  maintenance 
(scheduled  and 
unscheduled) and repair; 

b. justification is given that the frequency and duration of the component 
unavailabilities adequately represents typical facility operation; 

viii.  for CCFs: 

a.  the probability of failure associated with each CCF is derived using 
best-estimate methods; 

b.  where numerical values are derived through engineering judgement, 
adequate justification is given that this reflects the potential for common 
cause failures to occur. The engineering judgement should take account 
of  layout,  segregation  and  any  other  measures  adopted  to  reduce  the 
likelihood of a common cause failure (see NS-TAST-GD-036, Ref 7.6) 

ix. operator error probabilities:  

a.  should  reflect  the  complexity  of  the  task  required  and  the  factors 
which may be present which influence the performance of the operator 
(stress,  the  time  available,  training,  procedures  and  environmental 
conditions); 

b.  where  judgements  have  been  made,  the  basis  for  the  judgement  is 
stated and shown to be valid as far as possible; 

x.  the  measures  proposed  to  ensure  that  the  reliabilities  claimed  for 
components  and  systems  will  be  achieved  and/or  maintained,  are  stated  and 
evidence is available to demonstrate the adequacy of any such measures; 

xi.  the  possibility  of  component  failure  rates  or  unavailabilities  increasing  with 
time, e.g. through ageing, is considered. 

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the Data Analysis in PSAs for NPPs 
can be found in Tables A1-2.5 (Human Reliability Analysis) and A1-2.6 (Data Analysis) 
of Appendix 1. 

5.9 

Analysis of Internal and External Hazards 

1)    Development  of  internal  and  external  hazard  PSA  generally  follows  a  similar 
method to the Level 1 internal events PSA method, i.e.: selection of IE (in this case a 
particular  internal  or  external  hazard);  screening  and  bounding  of  the  IE;  accident 
sequence analysis and systems analysis. As such, the recommendations listed above 
are generally applicable for both hazard PSA and internal-events PSA. 

2)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the Analysis of Internal and External 
Hazards in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.7 of Appendix 1.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 19 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.10  Analysis of Other Operating Modes 

1)  As stated above, the scope of a PSA is expected to address all operating modes 
wherein the nuclear facility is expected to operate. The recommendations listed above 
are generally also applicable for PSA models of operating modes other than ‘at-power’. 

2)    Specific  assessment  expectations  for  review  of  the  Analysis  of  Low  Power  and 
Shutdown Modes in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.8 of Appendix 1. 

5.11  Evaluation of Release Frequencies 

Specific  assessment  expectations  for  review  of  the  Level  2  PSA*  for  NPPs  can  be 
found in Table A1-3 of Appendix 1. 

* For  NPPs, Level  1  PSA is the part of the  overall PSA that focuses  on the potential  for core 
damage;  Level  2  PSA  widens  this  analysis  to  consider  release  magnitudes  and  frequencies 
from losses of containment or otherwise; while Level 3 PSA is wider still, and considers risks to 
the public from off-site releases. 

 

5.12  Evaluation of Off-site Risks and Consequences 

Specific assessment expectations for review of the Level 3 PSA for NPPs can be found 
in Table A1-4 of Appendix 1. 

5.13  Multi-unit considerations 

The majority of existing and proposed nuclear sites in the UK contain multiple reactor 
units or other facilities.  Whilst the topic of multi-unit PSA is a topic of ongoing 
international research, dutyholders are expected to consider the impact of multiple 
reactor units and other facilities within the PSA.  For existing sites with limited 
dependencies between individual facilities this may be limited to a single unit PSA for a 
representative reactor unit or facility, supported by a justification for this approach 
providing a suitable and sufficient PSA to support the expected PSA applications.  For 
a new build site, or a site with significant or complex interactions between facilities, 
more detailed analysis may be required. 

ONR has an open research item on multi-unit PSA and provides a representative on 
OECD/NEA WGRISK and IAEA working groups for multi-unit PSA research topics.  
Further advice may be sought from inspectors involved in the ONR and international 
multi-unit PSA research topics as required. 

The following provides some general advice to inspectors on the different aspects of 
PSA relevant to multi-unit considerations: 

1) 

2) 

PSA scope.  As stated in Section 4.5, the scope of the PSA is expected to cover 
all significant sources of radioactivity on site.   The presence of multiple reactor 
units and other facilities on a site should be taken into account when developing 
and justifying the scope of the PSA. 

PSA methodologies.  There are a number of options available to dutyholders 
when considering multiple reactor units or facilities within the PSA.  This may 
extend from justification that a single unit model adequately represents the site, 
all the way to a fully integrated multi-unit PSA covering all sources of radioactivity 
on site, and various steps in-between.  There are advantages and disadvantages 
to the different approaches, depending upon the complexity of the site, the 
dependencies between the facilities, and the level of risk for the site.  The 
approach taken should be suitable to understand the risk and develop a suitable 
and sufficient PSA to support the expected PSA applications. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 20 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

3) 

4) 

5) 

6) 

7) 

8) 

Initiating events.  Initiating events which affect multiple units or facilities should 
be considered and analysed.  Initiating events which propagate between units or 
facilities should also be considered and analysed. 

Accident sequence analysis.  Dependencies and the potential for propagation 
between units and facilities should be identified and suitably considered in the 
PSA.  This may include safety systems, support systems, control systems, 
operator actions, CCFs, phenomenology, and radiological consequences.  The 
potential for a radiological release at one facility to impact the operator response 
on an adjacent facility should be considered. 

Input data.  Data used in the PSA model or any multi-unit sensitivity studies may 
be impacted by the scope of the PSA, including CCFs, operator actions and 
initiating event frequencies.  Data used in any multi-unit PSA models or studies 
should be documented and justified.   

Internal hazards.  The potential for propagation of internal hazards between units 
and facilities should be considered.  This may include tasks such as extending 
the fire PSA multi compartment analysis to consider adjacent facilities. 

External hazards.  Many external hazards have the potential to impact multiple 
facilities on the same site.  External hazard prioritisation and external hazards 
PSA models or sensitivity analysis should include consideration of all facilities 
which may be affected by the external hazard.  Additional analysis for seismic 
PSA may be required to consider the potential for correlation between SSCs in 
different facilities. 

Evaluation of off-site consequences.  Additional consequence analysis may be 
required to evaluate the consequences of a multi-unit accident.  For example, a 
seismic event may be considered to lead to a release on multiple similar 
facilities, with a similar or higher frequency than a single unit release, and 
therefore additional consequence analysis should be performed. 

9)  Quantification and presentation of results.  PSA results should be quantified, 
aggregated and presented in a suitable way to allow for comparison against 
SAPs numerical targets, understanding of sensitivity and uncertainty, 
demonstration of risks being reduced to ALARP and use of PSA results to 
support the expected PSA applications. 

10) 

Interpretation of numerical targets.  SAPs Numerical Targets 7 and 9 relate to 
site-wide risk, and therefore assessment against Numerical Targets 7 and 9 
should include consideration of all facilities on the site.  The SAPs contain a 
definition for societal risk (Target 9) which refers to “an activity from which risk is 
assessed as a whole and is under the control of one company in one location, or 
within a site boundary”.  

SAPs Numerical Target 8 relates to risk from a facility. The SAPs define a facility 
as “A part of a nuclear site identified as being a separate unit for the purposes of 
nuclear or radiological risk”. From a PSA point of view, dutyholders are expected 
to define the boundaries of each facility for the purposes of assessment against 
Target 8.  This definition should include consideration of dependencies.  For 
example, where facilities are coupled or connected, or multiple reactors are 
contained in close proximity within the same building or the same body of water 
they may be considered the same facility for the purposes of assessment against 
Target 8.  

5.14  Quantification of the Analysis 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 21 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1)    The  PSA  should  determine  the  combinations  of  basic  events  such  as  component 
failure,  CCF,  operator  error  and  plant  unavailability  which  lead  to  the  fault  sequence 
and  determine  its  frequency  of  occurrence.  The  methods  used  to  do  this  should  be 
identified  and  shown  to  be  adequate.  Due  to  the  complexity  of  the  analysis,  the 
quantification of the PSA normally requires a computer program. This code should be 
quality  assured  (see  AV.4)  and  the  evidence  of  this  should  be  provided  by  the 
dutyholder (AV.5). 

2)  The inspector may consider whether: 

i.  where  computer  programs  are  used,  they  and  their  results  are  verified, 
the 
manual  calculations  should  have  been 
dutyholder; 

independently  checked  by 

ii.  the  combinations  of  basic  events  (minimal  cutsets)  which  lead  to  failure  of 
the  protection  or  support  systems  are  identified  and  listed  for  each  of  the  IEs 
analysed; 

iii. that single order minimal cutsets are identified and brought to the attention of 
the assessors dealing with compliance with the single failure criteria; 

iv. the combinations of basic events do lead to the protection system failure (for 
this,  inspectors  should  review  a  sample  of  the  cutsets  including  those  which 
make the highest contributions to the frequency/probability calculated); 

v.  if the quantification of the analysis has required a restriction to be applied on 
the  probability  of  the  combinations  of  basic  events  included,  this  has  not 
affected the accuracy of the analysis significantly; 

vi. in the calculation, all dependencies are taken into account. This includes the 
dependency  between  redundant  components,  between  nominally  diverse 
systems and between individual operator errors. Dependencies due to common 
support systems should be modelled explicitly in the analysis; 

vii.  the  importance  of  IEs,  components,  systems,  operator  errors  and 
dependencies in the calculation of the risk have been identified. 

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the Quantification of PSAs for NPPs 
can be found in Table A1-2.9.2 of Appendix 1. 

5.15  Sensitivity and Uncertainty Studies 

1)  The results of the probabilistic analysis may be sensitive to the assumptions made 
and  the  data  used.  Since  these  contain  some  uncertainty,  studies  should  be  carried 
out to determine the degree of sensitivity to ensure that the conclusions drawn from the 
analysis are still valid in the light of these uncertainties (AV.6). These sensitivity studies 
should cover a sufficiently wide range of conditions to give confidence in the accuracy 
of the results of the analysis and the conclusions drawn from it. Standard importance 
functions  may  be  used  to  identify  the  critical  basic  events  to  be  covered  by  the 
sensitivity studies, as well as providing the means by which the impact to the risk can 
be gauged. 

2)  The inspector may check that: 

i. appropriate studies have been carried out to determine the sensitivity of the 
results  of  the  PSA to  any  significant  uncertainties  in  the  models,  assumptions 
and data; 

ii.  as  far  as  the  basic  event  data  is  concerned,  the  error  factors  used  are 
justified,  systematically  assigned  and  are  a  reasonable  representation  of  the 
uncertainty. 

3)    Specific  assessment  expectations  for  review  of  the  Sensitivity  and  Uncertainty 
Analyses in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.9.1 of Appendix 1. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 22 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

5.16  Presentation of the Results of the PSA 

1)  The results of the PSA should be presented in a form which allows comparison with 
the numerical targets of the SAPs and the dutyholder's own criteria. 

2)  The inspector may consider: 

i. whether sufficient information is provided to allow ONR to make a comparison 
with the SAPs; 

ii.  the  extent  to  which  the  results of  the  PSA  meet  the  numerical  target  in  the 
SAPs; 

iii.  whether  suitable  judgements  have  been  made,  where  possible,  of  the 
magnitude of ‘excluded’ contributions to the risk in relation to those calculated 
in the PSA; 

iv.  whether  the  results  of  the  PSA  have  been  reviewed  systematically  to 
determine if changes could be made to the design or operation of the facility to 
make  the  risks  as  low  as  reasonably  practicable  –  see  ONR’s  ALARP 
guidance, NS-TAST-GD-005 (Ref 7.1). 

v. whether, in cases where changes to the design or operation of the facility are 
proposed, the corresponding reduction in the risk has been calculated.  

3)  Specific assessment expectations for review of the Results of the PSAs for NPPs 
can be found in Tables  A1-2.9 (Level 1 PSA), A1-3.6 (Level 2 PSA), A1-4.2 (Level 3 
PSA) and A1-5 (Overall conclusions from the PSA) of Appendix 1. 

6. 

REFERENCES (GENERAL) 

6.1 

ONR, Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition.  

6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

US NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Handbook of Parameter Estimation for 
Probabilistic Risk Assessment, NUREG/CR-6823 (2002) 

BEDFORD, T, COOKE, R, Probabilistic Risk Analysis – Foundations and Methods, 
Cambridge University Press (2001) 

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Living Probabilistic Safety 
Assessment (PSA), IAEA-TECDOC-1106, IAEA, Vienna (1999) 

6.5 

HSE, Reducing Risks and Protecting People – HSE’s Decision Making Process, 2001 

6.6 

ONR, Risk informed regulatory decision making, 2017 

7. 

REFERENCES (TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT GUIDES, TAGS) 

7.1 

NS-TAST-GD-005, Guidance on the demonstration of ALARP. 

7.2 

NS-TAST-GD-011, The single failure criterion. 

7.3 

NS-TAST-GD-063, Human reliability analysis.  

7.4 

NS-TAST-GD-016, Integrity of metal components and structures. 

7.5 

NS-TAST-GD-017, Civil engineering. 

7.6 

NS-TAST-GD-036, Diversity, redundancy, segregation and layout of mechanical plant. 

7.7 

NS-TAST-GD-042, Validation of computer codes and calculation methods. 

7.8 

NS-TAST-GD-046, Computer based safety systems. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 23 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

7.9 

NS-TAST-GD-050, Periodic Safety Reviews (PSRs). 

7.10  NS-TAST-GD-051, The purpose, scope and content of safety cases. 

8. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY  

8.1 

8.2 

8.3 

8.4 

(See also list of References and Bibliography of Appendix 1) 

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Procedures for Conducting 
Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Non-Reactor Nuclear Facilities, IAEA TECDOC-
1267, IAEA, Vienna (2002) 

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, A Framework for a Quality Assurance 
Programme for PSA, IAEA-TECDOC-1101, IAEA, Vienna (1999).  

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IPERS Guidelines for the 
International Peer Review Service. Second Edition. Procedures for Conducting 
Independent Peer Reviews of Probabilistic Safety Assessments, IAEA-TECDOC-832, 
IAEA, Vienna (1995). 

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dependability Assessment of 
Software for Safety Instrumentation and Control Systems at NPPs, IAEA Nuclear 
Energy Series NP-T-3.27, IAEA, Vienna (2018) 

9. 

APPENDIX 1 - NS-TAST-GD-030 – ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS FOR REVIEW 
OF PSAS FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS 

A1-1  Introductory note 

A1-1.1    This  Appendix  provides  detailed  guidance  on  the  assessment  of  PSA  specific  for 
Nuclear  Power  Plants  (NPPs).  This  is  presented  in  the  form  of  a  Table  of  Assessment 
Expectations for different stages in the lifecycle of a nuclear power plant, i.e. PSAs submitted 
for  generic  design  assessment  (GDA),  site  licensing,  reactor  commissioning  and  to  support 
NPP  operation.  Inspectors  should  bear  in  mind  that  much  of  the  guidance  provided  in 
Appendix 1 can also be applied to other types of installations. 

A1-1.2    There  is  an  expectation  that  dutyholders  will  present  the  PSA  analysis  within  a 
framework compatible with good industry practices. For NPPs this suggests a traditional Level 
1, 2, 3 PSA framework as presented in IAEA Guidance (Refs A1-4.1 – A1-4.4). Inspectors will 
gain  confidence  in  the  acceptability  of  risk  from  the  facility  and  ALARP  compliance  by 
reviewing the facility risk level against the numerical targets of the SAPs and the probabilistic 
criteria  proposed  by  INSAG  (Ref  A1-4.5),  which  implies  a  need  to  calculate  the  appropriate 
risk figures of merit including core damage frequency and large release frequency. 

A1-1.3  However, in order to address the relevant numerical targets of the SAPs, dutyholders 
will also need to identify and study those sequences that have a higher frequency but lower 
radiological  consequence.  As  an  example,  in  PWRs,  Steam  Generator  Tube  Rupture 
sequences without core damage could lead to releases in the lower dose bands of Numerical 
Target 8 of the SAPs. The guidance in this Appendix does not specifically cover assessment 
expectations for PSA studies addressing release categories for non-core damage sequences. 
ONR prefers that dutyholders present the PSAs for NPPs in the traditional Level 1, 2, 3 PSA 
framework  as  discussed  above,  addressing  release  categories  for  non-core  damage 
sequences separately.  

A1-1.4  Other aspects not specifically covered by the guidance in this Appendix include worker 
risk and risk from facilities at the NPP other than the nuclear reactor. Nevertheless, these risks 
need to be evaluated by the dutyholders in order to address the relevant numerical targets of 
the SAPs.  

A1-2  Not used 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

 
 

Page 24 of 81 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

A1-3  Use of this Appendix 
A1-3.1    The  Tables  in  this  Appendix  present  check  lists  of  items  that  inspectors  should 
generally expect to see when assessing the different areas of the PSAs for nuclear reactors. 
The aim is to address all key aspects of modern PSA for nuclear reactors to help inspectors to 
assess,  raise  comments,  questions  and  issues  in  a  focused  and  systematic  fashion,  and, 
finally, judge the adequacy of each feature of the PSAs submitted by the dutyholders.  

A1-3.2  Although an attempt has been made to make this appendix comprehensive, it is only 
meant  for  guidance  and  by  no  means  should  be  taken  to  imply  that  inspectors  have  no 
discretion when choosing the scope and depth of the assessment to be undertaken.  

A1-3.3  In addition, it should be stressed that  is not the intention of Appendix 1 to prescribe 
specific methods and approaches for conducting PSA for NPPs. Dutyholders may choose to 
use alternative methods to those covered in this appendix as long as they are shown to lead 
to  equally  valid  outcomes.  In  cases  where  the  PSA  or  specific  areas  of  it  have  been 
undertaken using alternative approaches, inspectors, should review on a case-by-case basis 
and judge each on its own merits.  

A1-3.4  This Appendix can be used in a more prescriptive manner when commissioning PSA 
assessment  work  (to  be  done  on  behalf  of  ONR)  from  external  contractors.  In  such  cases, 
inspectors may wish to restrict the use of discretion by the contractor and/or specify the scope 
and depth of assessment. 

A1-4  References 
A1-4.1  INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety Assessment and Verification 
for  Nuclear  Power  Plants,  Safety  Standards  Series,  Safety  Guide  NS-G-1.2,  IAEA,  Vienna 
(2001) 

 

INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Procedures 

A1-4.2 
for  Conducting 
Probabilistic Safety Assessment of Nuclear Power Plants (Level 1), Safety Series No 50-P-4, 
IAEA, Vienna (1992) 

 

INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Procedures 

A1-4.3 
for  Conducting 
Probabilistic  Safety  Assessments  of  Nuclear  Power  Plants  (Level  2):  Accident  Progression, 
Containment  Analysis  and  Estimation  of  Accident  Source  Terms,  Safety  Series  No.  50-P-8, 
IAEA, Vienna, 1995 

 

INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Procedures 

A1-4.4 
for  Conducting 
Probabilistic Safety Assessments of Nuclear Power Plants (Level 3), IAEA-Safety Series 50-P-
12, IAEA, Vienna (1996). 

A1-4.5  INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR SAFETY ADVISORY GROUP, Basic Safety Principles 
for Nuclear Power Plants, 75-INSAG-3 Rev. 1, INSAG-12, IAEA, Vienna (1999) 

A1-5  Bibliography 
A1-5.1    AMERICAN  SOCIETY  OF  MECHANICAL  ENGINEERS,  Standard  for  Probabilistic 
Risk Assessment for Nuclear Power Plant Applications, ASME RA-S-1.4-2013 (2013) 

A1-5.2    AMERICAN  NUCLEAR  SOCIETY,  External  Events  PRA  Methodology,  American 
National Standard, ANSI/ANS-58.21-2007 (2007) 

A1-5.3    EPRI/NRC-RES,  Fire  PRA  Methodology  for  Nuclear  Power  Facilities,  NUREG/CR-
6850 (2005) 

A1-5.4    AMERICAN  NUCLEAR  SOCIETY,  Fire  PRA  Methodology,  American  National 
Standard, ANSI/ANS-58.23-2007 (2007) 

A1-5.5    EUROPEAN  UTILITY  REQUIREMENTS  FOR  LWR  NUCLEAR  POWER  PLANTS, 
Volume 2: Generic Nuclear Island Requirements – Chapter 17: PSA Methodology, Revision C 
(2001) 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 25 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Determining 

A1-5.6 
the  quality  of 
probabilistic  safety  assessment  (PSA)  for  applications  in  nuclear  power  plants,  IAEA-
TECDOC-1511, IAEA, Vienna (2006) 

A1-5.7    INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Development  and  Application  of 
Level 1 Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, Specific Safety Guide No. 
SSG-3. IAEA, Vienna 2010. 

A1-5.8    INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Development  and  Application  of 
Level 2 Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, Specific Safety guide No. 
SSG-4. IAEA, Vienna 2010. 

 A1-5.9  INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Probabilistic safety assessments of 
Nuclear Power Plants for low power and shutdown modes, IAEA-TECDOC-1144, IAEA (2000) 

A1-5.10    INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Review  of  Probabilistic  Safety 
Assessments by Regulatory Bodies, IAEA-Safety Report Series No 25, IAEA, Vienna (2002) 

A1-5.11    INTERNATIONAL  ATOMIC  ENERGY  AGENCY,  Treatment  of  Internal  Fires  in 
Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, IAEA Safety Report Series No. 10, 
IAEA, Vienna (1998) 

A1-5.12  NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE, Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) Peer Review 
Process Guidance, NEI 00 02 (2000) 

A1-5.13    NUCLEAR  ENERGY  INSTITUTE,  Process  for  Performing  Follow  on  PRA  Peer 
Reviews using the ASME PRA standard, NEI 05-04 (January 2005) 

 

 

 

 

  

 

A1-6  Table of Assessment Expectations 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

1. 

Table A1-1.  General Expectations 

Table A1-1.1  Approaches and methodologies 

This table lists PSA Assessment Expectations for all the technical 
areas of Level 1, 2 and 3 PSA. It is not the intention of this guide to 
prescribe specific methods and approaches for all those technical 
areas.  

The dutyholder may choose to use alternative methods to those 
covered by this table of expectations as long as they lead to equally 
valid outcomes.  

In cases where the PSA or specific areas of it have been undertaken 
using alternative approaches, ONR will review them on a case-by-
case basis and judge them on their own merits. External expert 
support should be sought where necessary.  

Task procedures have been developed for the individual PSA tasks 
and these have been provided by the dutyholder. 

ONR inspectors may wish to assess or audit the PSA task procedures 
to gain confidence on the general adequacy of the methods and 
approaches and their implementation, before specific detailed 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 26 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

assessments are undertaken of the various aspects of the PSA 
models and data. 

Inspectors may wish to request information on any independent or 
peer review of the PSA commissioned by the dutyholders (e.g., 
scope, findings, dutyholder’s action plan to address findings and their 
status) in order to plan and inform their own assessment. 

Inspectors may consider requesting the dutyholders to conduct self-
assessments against this TAG and provide the results to ONR. 

Table A1-1.2  PSA Scope 

The overall risk analysis of the NPP covers all sources of radioactivity 
at the facility (reactor core, fuel ponds, fuel handling facilities, waste 
storage tanks, etc).  

Adequate justification is provided when sources of radioactivity are 
not included in the scope of the detailed PSA. 

The PSA covers all types of initiating events (internal events, internal 
hazards, external hazards). 

The PSA covers all operational modes. 

Table A1-1.3  Freeze Date 

The freeze date for the design and operational features reflected in a 
particular submission should be explicitly stated. 

All the PSA models, data, documents and references that support the 
submission are up-to-date and consistent with the “freeze date”. 

Table A1-1.4  Computer Codes and Inputs 

The codes used (e.g. for derivation of success criteria, accident 
progression analyses, analysis of structural integrity of containment 
and any other structures, fission product release and transport, 
consequences on human health, etc) have been verified, validated or 
qualified, as appropriate.  

All codes and inputs meet ONR quality expectations as described in 
SAPs paragraphs 678 ff and NS-TAST-GD-042. 

The analyses, including the development and operation of the 
computer codes, have been performed by suitable qualified and 
experienced analysts. 

The degree of accuracy, uncertainties and limitations associated with 
the selected computer codes are identified. 

The codes have been used within their limit of applicability. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 27 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

The modelling (nodalization) of the plant inputted as underlying basis 
for the code calculations (e.g., thermal-hydraulic, accident 
progression, structural integrity, etc), is adequate and auditable. 

The PSA quantification software is capable of quantifying the entire 
model. 

The input data files for the code calculations are auditable.  

The sources of information (e.g. design documents) are identified. 

  

Facility-specific and site-specific information are used.  

If walk downs are used to obtain input data, these are documented in 
an auditable fashion. 

ONR holds a license for the PSA quantification software used, or 
alternative suitable arrangements for PSA quantification by ONR 
inspectors (or their contractors) are feasible. 

All computer files for the PSA model/s and reliability database/s have 
been provided to ONR. 

Table A1-1.5  Assumptions in the PSA 

All assumptions made throughout the study are clearly identified, 
described and properly justified. 

The specific aspects of the PSA models or data related to these 
assumptions are clear.  

A table of assumptions is provided. 

The PSA may have to make use of assumptions for aspects of the 
facility not yet available / under development and also when factual 
information is missing or incomplete – it should be noted, however, 
that ONR would not consider acceptable the use of assumptions in 
the PSA in lieu of making use of factual information which is available 
or can be obtained.   

A process is in place to capture, track and review assumptions made 
in the PSA, which could be affected by siting, design and 
construction, or operational matters (such as procedures, 
maintenance and testing strategies, training programmes, control 
room staffing and organisation, etc), which need to be reviewed when 
detailed information becomes available.  

The system to capture, track and review PSA assumptions enables 
the latest available design an operational information to be transferred 
to the PSA so that assumptions (and models) can be reviewed 
accordingly. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 28 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

2. 

Table A1-2.  Level 1 PSA 

All the criteria used in the Level 1 PSA are defined and are adequate, 
for example criteria for CORE DAMAGE for the Reactor PSA, criteria 
for FUEL DAMAGE for the Fuel Route PSA, etc. 

If design targets for CORE DAMAGE FREQUENCY, FUEL DAMAGE 
FREQUENCY, etc, have been identified, these are explicitly stated. 

Table A1-2.1  Identification and Grouping of Initiating Events 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The task scope is explicitly stated:  

  For  the  Reactor  PSA,  this  task  addresses  all  disturbances  that 
require  mitigation  to  prevent  core  damage  and  those  that  lead 
directly to core damage.  

  For the Fuel Route PSA, this task addresses all disturbances that 
require  mitigation  to  prevent  fuel  damage  and  those  that  lead 
directly to fuel damage.  

The process used in the identification and definition of initiating 
events is clear and leads to a systematic and comprehensive 
identification of initiating events. 

Detailed records exists of all deductive analyses (e.g. master logic 
diagrams) and / or inductive analyses (e.g. failure modes and effects 
analyses) done to identify initiating events. All assumptions are 
captured. 

Previous experience at similar NPPs has been searched for and fed 
back into the initiating event identification process. 

The source documents used are identified. The applicability of the 
information extracted and used from these source documents is clear. 

A database exists of abnormal events and incidents which have led 
(or could lead) to disruption of normal operation. This includes those 
equipment failures that led to an initiating event and any 
consequential failures to perform one or more of the safety functions 
required. It also includes information on any test or maintenance 
activity taking place at the time which could be related to the event. 

A database exists for future recording of abnormal events and 
incidents which lead (or could lead) to disruption of normal operation. 

The analysis of the applicability of the initiating events to each 
operating mode is transparent. 

Consequential initiating events have been addressed and the way in 
which they are developed is clear.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 29 of 81 

 
 

Table A1-2.2  Accident sequence Development: Determination of Success Criteria 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Each initiating event is clearly defined and characterised (i.e. its 
causes and impact on plant are identified). 

The process for grouping initiating events is clear, i.e. the grouping 
criteria and the mapping to derive the final initiating event groups are 
transparent. 

Each initiating event group is represented by the most onerous event. 

The initiating event groups have been defined in a way that 
vulnerabilities are not masked.  

Each initiating event group is clearly defined and characterised. The 
information provided is sufficient for the quantification of initiating 
event frequencies (i.e. its causes are identified) and for the 
development of accident sequence models (i.e. its impact on plant is 
stated).  

For each initiating event group, the safety functions, the systems 
which can perform each of the functions, and any need for operator 
intervention, are identified.  

The sources and methods used for the derivation of success criteria 
are transparent. 

The limiting conditions defined for success / failure (for example, 
cladding temperature, coolant system pressure, coolant system level, 
enthalpy in fuel pellets, containment temperature and pressure, etc.) 
are stated, justified, and are realistic. 

The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (and any other) analyses used for 
derivation of success criteria have been performed on a best-estimate 
basis and are specific to the facility. 

Sufficient and representative thermal-hydraulic analyses have been 
performed to demonstrate that each of the success paths depicted in 
the event trees do indeed lead to successful outcomes (e.g., non core 
damage).  These analyses are available and traceable. 

Sufficient and representative thermal-hydraulic analyses have been 
performed to demonstrate that a given system response will prevent 
the safety limit being exceeded.   

Timing for operator actions is justified (e.g. by sufficient and 
representative thermal-hydraulic analyses). 

The supporting analyses used to define the success criteria for each 
success sequence in the event trees have adequately addressed the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 30 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

following: 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

If initiating events have been grouped, the most onerous initiator is 
considered. 

  Sequence  assumptions  (e.g.,  LOCA  break  location)  have  been 
the 

to  be  bounding 

for 

appropriately  chosen  and 
justified 
sequences depicted in the event trees. 

  The  influence  of  the  physical  conditions  that  arise  during  the 
evolution  of  the  sequences  on  the  functionality  and  operability  of 
the  systems  and  the  functions  has  been  taken  into  consideration 
in the evaluation of the success criteria 

  The  analyses  have  considered 

for  each 
sequence  (time  required  to  reach  a  stable  state  that  can  be 
maintained without the actuation of additional systems)  

the  mission 

time 

  Event  timings  and  time  window  definitions  have  been  adequately 

treated.   

  Timings  for  a  manual  action  at  a  given  header  are  based  on 
accident sequence modelling which appropriately treats preceding 
manual actions. 

  Any  conservatisms  are  identified,  and  there  are  no  excessive 

conservatisms. 

  The use of the codes for each specific application is justified. 

If use is made of success criteria for the various initiating event 
groups from sources other than facility-specific analyses, the rationale 
for this and the analysis of applicability are transparent and the 
justification is adequate. 

The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (and any other) analyses used for 
derivation of success criteria are thoroughly documented and fully 
traceable. 

For each success criterion, all applicable items are identified and 
defined: 

  Clear definition of exact meaning of ‘success’.  

  Minimum  equipment  requirements  and  performance  for  success 

(including mission times) 

  Details of the specific operator actuations required and latest time 
for  manual  actuation  which  can  lead  to  success  (especially 
considering any prior manual actions). 

The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset 
of thermal-hydraulic, neutronics and any other supporting analyses. In 
these cases no significant errors have been found. 

The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 31 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

subset of thermal-hydraulic, neutronics and any other supporting 
analyses. In these cases, the results obtained are consistent with 
those presented by the dutyholder.   

Table A1-2.3  Accident Sequence Development: Event Sequence Modelling 

Table A1-2.3.1  General 

The general assumptions relating to all event tree development are 
defined up-front and properly justified. 

General information is provided on the type of event tree models 
produced and on the level at which the event tree headings are 
defined (safety function, system, train). 

The descriptive text for all event tree headings is clear and consistent 
(and preferably expressed as functional success, e.g., “Injection of 
2oo3 HHSI pumps” or “Operator starts depressurisation”, etc). 

Sequence end states are identified and defined. 

Any sequence end-state other than “Success” or “Core Damage” is 
identified and defined, the rationale for its use explained (including the 
overall contribution to the conclusions of the PSA). 

As many event trees as necessary have been constructed so that the 
PSA model does not have asymmetries artificially built in.  This is of 
upmost importance to ensure the suitability of the PSA to support a 
number of applications such as Risk Monitoring and those 
applications based on evaluation of the results of the Importance 
Analysis 

All the sequences have been developed to a point in which a safe 
stable state that can be maintained in the “long-term” without the 
actuation of additional systems has been achieved.   

The sequence timings are stated and justified. 

Sequences in which a safe stable state has not been achieved (within 
the established timing) have been assigned to Core Damage.  

The evolution of the sequence of events following the representative 
initiator from each initiating event group is described. This includes 
the parameters that cause reactor trip, the signals / channels that 
initiate various safety functions, and the operators’ intervention in the 
course of the sequence. 

The timing of events in the sequence following the success or failure 
of signals / safety functions are identified and defined. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-2.3.2  Specific for each Initiating Event Group Event Tree 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 32 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All dependencies (human actions, equipment, environmental, spatial, 
common mode failure, fluid medium) are identified and the way in 
which such dependencies have been treated and included in the 
accident sequences (either explicitly or implicitly) is correct.  

Analysis to identify subtle dependencies has been carried out and 
these have been incorporated in the PSA models. Some examples of 
subtle dependencies are those which may arise between initiating 
event and the safety functions / systems due to software based 
control and protection systems, vapour locking of pipes due to high 
temperature, and other dependencies which may otherwise have 
been missed. 

Each heading in the event tree is described, and its relationship to a 
functional fault tree, system fault tree, human failure event, or other 
event is identified. 

When the same event tree heading is used with different boundary 
conditions for different sequences (e.g., to capture dependencies on 
the success or failure of preceding event headings), the various 
boundary conditions for each heading are described. Its relationship, 
depending on each boundary condition, to one or more functional 
fault trees, system fault trees, human failure events, or other events is 
identified. The way in which this is implemented in the modelling is 
clearly described. 

The mission time for each heading of each branch of the tree, when 
applicable, is stated and justified (see SAPs para 652). 

(Note: The IAEA standard on Level 1 PSA No SSG-3 indicates in 
paragraph 5.49 says: "The success criteria should specify the mission 
times for the safety systems, that is, the time that the safety systems 
will need to operate so that the reactor reaches a safe, stable 
shutdown state and that will allow for long term measures to be put in 
place to maintain this state. In many cases this has been taken to be 
24 or 48 hrs for most initiating event. For new designs that provide the 
features to delay core damage, consideration of longer mission time 
may be necessary" 

There are more references to mission time in this standard (e.g., 
paragraph 5.135, 9.28, 9.31, 9.53,).  

The ASME PRA standard is also clear about this indicating that the 
end states of the Level 1 PSA have to be a "Steady state condition" at 
the end of the mission time or "Core Damage") 

The link between the various headings / nodes of the event tree and 
the relevant thermal-hydraulic analyses performed to support the 
event sequence modelling is transparent. 

The link is clear between the various headings / nodes of the event 
tree and the relevant operational and emergency procedures to be 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 33 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

used.  

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Any basic event used to replace an integrated time dependent 
function (such as the failure to recover off-site power before a certain 
time interval has elapsed given that the diesel generators have failed 
to supply power) is properly described and substantiated. 
Confirmation is included that potential dependencies have been 
examined and also explanation of how these have been dealt with (if 
applicable) included.  

The treatment of consequential initiators within the event trees is 
clear, as well as the transfer of the end state of sequences in one tree 
to initiators in other event trees. 

Appropriate explanations are included of the functional fault trees 
developed to link the event tree headings with the system fault trees. 

The link between the functional fault trees and the relevant success 
criteria is stated.  

The functional fault trees are correct. They provide an adequate 
representation of the functional failures intended. 

The information required to set up the boundary conditions for the 
quantification of each sequence is transparent. 

The event trees have been constructed correctly and provide 
adequate representations of the evolution of the accident sequences 
following all the initiating event groups under consideration. 

Table A1-2.4  Systems Analysis 

Table A1-2.4.1  General 

The approach used for the definition of system boundaries is 
transparent and adequate. 

The approach used to define component boundaries in the 
mechanical, I&C and electrical subsystems is transparent and 
adequate. 

The general approach applied for the inclusion of unavailabilities due 
to test and maintenance activities, in the system models is 
transparent and adequate. 

The general approach used for the inclusion of pre-accident human 
failure events (e.g. individual and common cause component 
misalignments and mis-calibrations of instrument and protection 
channels) into the system models is clear and adequate. 

The general approach used for the inclusion of post-accident human 
failure events (detection, decision errors, omission errors, commission 

 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 34 of 81 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

errors, etc, and common cause human failures) into the system 
models is clear and adequate.  

The general approach used for the inclusion of (hardware / software) 
common cause failure (CCF) events into the system models is clear. 
The approach is adequate and includes consideration of both intra-
system and inter-system CCF events.  

The general approach applied for the inclusion of structural failures 
into the system models is clear and adequate. 

The general approach applied for the inclusion of passive component 
failures into the system models is clear and adequate. 

The event naming scheme is clear and consistent throughout the 
models. 

Generally applicable modelling assumptions, e.g. those related to 
inclusion or exclusion of passive components, criteria for inclusion or 
exclusion of diversion paths, etc, are defined up-front and properly 
justified. 

The list of failure modes applicable to each component type is 
identified up-front and complete.  

The descriptive text for all fault tree gates and basic events is clear 
and it is consistently expressed as functional failure, e.g., “2oo3 HHSI 
pumps fail to inject”, “Pump X fails to start”, etc). 

A description of the way in which circular logics (also known as logic 
loops) have been dealt with in the fault tree models is provided and is 
adequate. 

The level of detail of the system fault tree models is consistent 
throughout the system analysis. 

The level of detail of the fault trees is sufficient to ensure: that they 
are realistic; that the logic of the models is correct; that all the 
dependencies are captured; that the resulting cutsets for failures of 
the system reflect combinations of failures that can be easily 
understood; and that the data used is applicable to the boundary 
selected for each component basic event in the PSA. 

The fault trees do not have asymmetries artificially built in.  This is of 
upmost importance to ensure the suitability of the PSA to support a 
number of applications such as Risk Monitoring and those 
applications based on evaluation of the results of Importance 
Analysis. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-2.4.2  Specific for each System Model 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 35 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A description of the system is available that covers: the description of 
the system and its operation modes, its normal configuration when 
the reactor is at power, its configuration(s) following reactor trip, and 
its configuration for non-power states.  

A simplified system diagram is presented that includes all the 
components modelled (adequately labelled, and without omission) 
and that clearly indicates the system boundaries and interfaces with 
other systems.  

The references to all design information / characteristics, including 
environmental qualification of all system components are listed and 
up-to-date. 

The system boundaries are clearly identified and there are no gaps 
and / or overlaps at the interface with other systems modelled in the 
PSA. 

System success criteria are stated. 

The success criteria applied in the PSA model (e.g. the applied front-
line system success criteria) are consistent with those obtained in the 
task on determination of success criteria.  

The success criteria for support systems are consistent with the 
outcome from the task analysis of front line systems. 

The information on dependencies for each component is transparent 
(including the support systems / actuation signal interface points).  

Any dependency on room / cabinet cooling is considered when 
necessary for normal and post trip conditions for all initiators.  

No dependencies are missing. 

The resulting success criteria for the system’s support systems based 
on the above is stated.  

Information on system tests is provided (including, for each system 
test, relevant aspects such as test frequency, components and failure 
modes tested, system realignments and component unavailabilities 
due to test). 

Information on system maintenance for all components is provided 
(including the mechanical and electrical tag out boundaries, i.e. an 
identification of all the mechanical, electrical, instrumentation, etc, 
components which are functionally unavailable or isolated in order to 
perform the maintenance). 

Fault tree modelling assumptions specific to the system (including all 
those assumptions made to simplify the model) are described, 
justified and reasonable. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 36 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Appropriate explanations are included to facilitate understanding of 
the fault tree logic. This should also include descriptions of the way in 
which specific circular logics have been removed. 

All dependencies are captured in the fault tree and have been 
modelled correctly. 

All relevant component failures have been correctly included in the 
fault tree.  

The events that represent unavailabilities due to testing and 
maintenance have been modelled correctly. 

All configurations allowed by the NPP procedures are represented in 
the models. 

The chosen modelling “solution” to avoid combinations of 
maintenance activities forbidden by rules and procedures has been 
implemented properly.  

Hardware failures that contribute to the Human Failure Events (e.g. 
failure of the alarms or indications) have been included in the model.   

Justification has been provided for any cases where these hardware 
failures have not been included based on the assumption that the 
HFE dominates. 

All relevant human failure events have been correctly included in the 
fault tree  

All house events used to deal with asymmetry in the system 
alignment or to enable the single fault tree model to be used for the 
various possible system configurations are listed and described.  

The purpose of each house event is clear.  

A table is included that lists the house events modelled in the system 
fault trees and their settings in each heading, sequence or event tree. 
The settings are correct. 

The use of lumped, module events or super-components has been 
avoided or minimised to the extent possible. 

If lumped, module events or super-components (beyond the pre-
established component boundaries) are used in the fault trees, the 
contents included within the boundary of the event are clearly 
identified (in terms of components, failure modes and interrelations).  

If lumped, module events or super-components are used in the fault 
trees, information on dependencies (outside the event boundary) is 
transparent. These dependencies are properly captured in the fault 
tree models. No dependencies are missing. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 37 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-2.5  Human Reliability Analysis (HRA) 

All intra-system and inter-system CCFs to be modelled in the system 
fault tree have been identified in conformance with the general 
approach to the analysis of CCFs. 

All hardware recoveries modelled are described and justified. 

All the system fault trees (top gates) are listed together with their 
description.  

All the gates which are transfers to other system models (e.g. support 
system top gates) are listed together with their description. 

All the modelled events are listed together with their descriptions. This 
list is traceable to the fault trees and the system simplified diagram 
and description. 

The fault tree logic is correct. No events are missing. The fault trees 
provide an adequate representation of the system failures for the 
facility under evaluation. 

Note: The expectations in this table are consistent with the guidance 
provided in the TAG on Human Reliability Analysis NS-TAST-GD-063 

The methodology/ies selected for the HRA, and in particular for the 
evaluation of human error probabilities (HEP), including the choice of 
human reliability data sources, is / are justified.  

The types of human failure events, HFEs, (i.e. those basic events in 
the fault trees and event trees which represent the human-induced 
failures of functions, systems or components) that are included in the 
logic model structure are identified up-front. Important types of HFEs 
have not been omitted. 

Pre-initiating event HFEs include individual and common-cause 
misalignments and mis-calibrations. The identification of these events 
is complete.  

If some potential pre-initiating event HFEs are not included in the 
model, adequate justification is provided.  

The modelling of pre-initiating event HFEs events is correct. 

If HFEs associated with initiating events are embedded in the data 
used in the analysis of initiating event frequencies for the Full Power 
PSA, justification is provided that these human actions have been 
adequately captured. 

Explicit analysis of HFEs associated with the initiating event is 
generally performed for the PSA for Low Power and Shutdown modes 
(see Table A1- 2.8 below). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 38 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Post-initiating event HFEs include failures to carry out required 
actions in response to procedures, alarms and other cues and un-
required human actions in response to situations that have been 
diagnosed incorrectly. The identification of these events is complete.  

If cases exist where the HFE related to the detection / decision part of 
the human action has been modelled separately from the HFE/s 
related to the manual actuation part of the human action, the rationale 
for this is clear. 

If some potential post-initiating event HFEs are not included in the 
model, adequate justification is provided.  

The modelling of post-initiating event HFEs events is correct. 

For each pre-initiating event HFE, all the operational activities which 
could lead to the human error are identified (e.g. surveillance tests, 
calibrations, maintenance activities or operational realignments).  

For each pre-initiating event HFE, all the alarms, indications, 
surveillances or tests credited to contribute to the recovery of the mis-
alignment / mis-calibration are identified. The ability to recover the 
HFE is clear in each case. 

For each pre-initiating event HFE which involves failure to respond to 
procedural steps, equipment failures, alarms or other cues, the cues 
are identified. 

Occasions for misdiagnosis of the situation by the operators have 
been analysed systematically.  

HFEs resulting from identified credible mis-diagnosis have been 
modelled correctly (e.g. human actuations due to mis-diagnosis that 
change the course of an accident sequence will normally be modelled 
in the event trees. Un-required switching off of systems due to mis-
diagnosis will normally be modelled in the fault trees). 

The human reliability quantification method/s selected is / are suitable 
for the specific type of HFEs addressed with the method.  

Specific human error contributors to each HFE are identified:  

  The  task  analysis  is  complete:  sub-tasks  included  as  possible 
contributors  to  the  HFE  and  the  ones  which  are  not  included  are 
identified. The rationale for the exclusion of sub-tasks is clear. 

 

Facility-specific and HFE-specific influences of the factors required by 
the quantification model (Performance Shaping Factors, PSFs) are 
identified.  

Facility-specific information obtained from observations made during 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 39 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

walk-downs and simulator exercises, review of procedures, 
discussions with, and interviews and questionnaires to personnel, etc, 
is used to characterise the PSFs for each HFE. The sources of 
information are identified and auditable. The way in which this 
information is used is transparent.  

Time windows are correctly assigned; justification is given for the 
choice of events that mark the start and end of the time windows 
(cues and limiting times), dead times and time spent on other tasks 
are accounted for and adjustments made as appropriate.  

Specific expectations for the assessment of the HRA in Low Power 
and Shutdown PSA are included in Table A1- 2.8 below. 

Specific expectations for the assessment of the HRA for the Hazards 
PSA are included in Table A1- 2.7 below. 

The quantification of all the HFEs is transparent.  

The quantification of all the HFEs has been done correctly and in 
accordance with the HRA method/s selected. 

If the probabilities for some HFEs in the models have not been 
calculated using detailed HRA analyses (as above), an adequate 
justification for the generic (screening) values used is provided. 

Dependencies between HFEs appearing in the same accident 
sequence are identified and accounted for.  

The process by which the candidates for dependency were identified 
is transparent. 

Any assumptions made in the dependency analysis are described 
and justified. 

The determination of the degree of dependency is transparent and 
justified. 

The method by which the conditional probabilities of dependent HFEs 
are calculated is clear.  

The dependency analysis is adequate.  

A list of all the HFEs included in the PSA, and their associated mean 
probabilities and uncertainty ranges is included. This list is traceable 
to all the supporting analysis. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-2.6  Data Analysis 

Table A1-2.6.1  Initiating Event Frequencies 

The initiating event definitions used in the data analysis task are fully 
consistent with those used in the list of initiating events. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 40 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The criteria for selection of analysis methods are stated.  

The approaches used to quantify initiating event frequencies are 
suitable for each type of initiating event addressed.  

The approach/es used to quantify frequencies of consequential 
initiating events is / are correct.  

The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. 

Facility-specific event data has been used to the extent possible. 

For cases where facility-specific event data is used, the source of 
event records is available, comprehensive and auditable. 

Facility-specific records have been interpreted correctly. 

For cases where operational experience from NPPs of similar design 
is used, its applicability is justified and the data used is auditable. 

In all cases where either NPP-specific data or data from NPPs of 
similar design has been used, information on the operating history of 
the facility/ies where the event/s occurred has been used in the 
determination of the denominators for the evaluation of initiating event 
frequencies. This information is auditable. 

For cases where generic reactor type initiating event frequencies are 
used, this is justified and documented in an auditable fashion. 

For cases where several sources of data are combined, the method 
of combination is mathematically correct and has identified and taken 
into consideration possible overlaps between the various data 
sources. 

For cases where logical models are used to calculate the initiating 
event frequencies, these include all the foreseen inputs leading to the 
initiating event. 

The fault trees, human reliability analyses or other models used to 
calculate initiating event frequencies are documented. In order to 
review these, inspectors can use the relevant tables of this Appendix. 

The initiating event groups are assigned frequencies equal to the 
summed frequency of all the events in the group.  

A list of all the initiating events, together with their frequencies, is 
included. Each initiating event frequency is represented by a mean 
value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is 
traceable to the supporting analyses.  

A list of all the initiating event groups, together with their frequencies, 
is included. Each initiating event group frequency is represented by a 
mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 41 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

is traceable to the supporting analyses.  

MET? 

Table A1-2.6.2  Random Component Failure Probabilities 

The component populations together with their characteristics (e.g 
those that define each population and make it a coherent set) are 
clearly identified. The component populations defined are adequate. 

The component boundaries (for each component population) used in 
the data analysis task are shown to be exactly the same as those 
used in the fault tree models.  

The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. 

For each component population that has been assigned failure rates 
from a generic data source (or a source other than the facility itself), 
justification is provided that the source is appropriate. Evidence is 
included that the component boundaries (for the particular component 
population) in the PSA and in the generic source of data are 
consistent. 

For cases where several sources of generic data are combined: the 
method of combination is transparent; it has identified, and correctly 
taken into consideration, possible overlaps between different sources 
of generic data; and it is mathematically correct. 

Facility-specific data has been used to the extent possible. 

Where facility-specific data has been used either in isolation or 
combined with generic data to calculate failure rates for component 
populations, (including the use of multiple subcomponent data within 
the fault tree component boundary) the event records, engineering 
data, and operating history data (e.g., records of operating / stand-by 
hours, of test / maintenance / repair time history) which have been 
used are available and traceable.  

The collection of facility records is comprehensive and exhaustive.  

Evidence is provided that the PSA data analysts have checked the 
quality and reliability of the facility-specific records used to support the 
PSA.  

Facility-specific records have been interpreted correctly (in particular 
to identify the failure modes modelled in the fault tree) 

The interpretation of historical records to reconstruct demand counts, 
operational times, etc. is clear.  

The method used for estimating failure rate parameters from raw data 
is transparent and mathematically correct. No calculation errors are 
identified. 

The method used for estimating failure rate parameters from 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 42 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

combinations of generic and facility-specific data (or of pre-existing 
and new facility-specific data) is transparent, mathematically correct 
and state-of-the-art. No calculation errors are identified. 

For component types where manufacturer’s data or expert-judgement 
has been used, a robust justification is provided that neither facility-
specific, nor generic data are available.  

In instances where expert judgement has been used to estimate 
component failure rates, the process is transparent and robust and 
the outcome of the process is reasonable. Error factors are assigned 
commensurate with the uncertainty in the process. 

Instances where manufacturer’s data has been used are clearly 
stated and the resulting failure rates are reasonable. Error factors are 
assigned commensurate with the uncertainty in the data used. 

Facility-specific information on test intervals is used to calculate 
probabilities for the failure modes of the components on standby. The 
tests selected are suitable for the failure modes of concern. This 
information is consistent with the information on system testing 
recorded in the documentation of the system analysis.  

The mission times (used to calculate the probabilities of failure to 
operate of components) are correct and consistent with the 
information on mission times recorded in the documentation of the 
Success Criteria Determination task. 

The methodology used for the calculation of structural failure 
probabilities is justified. The details of the analysis are transparent. 

If use is made of data from structural (e.g. pipework) failure 
databases, the sources of data and the way in which this data has 
been used are clear. The applicability of the data is justified. 

If use is made of a probabilistic fracture mechanics code, the code is 
state of the art. Evidence is provided that the code has been validated 
against operational experience and / or experiments. Evidence is 
provided that the code users are sufficiently qualified and experienced 
to be aware of the code’s capabilities and limitations.  

The range of loads and combinations of loads that could lead to the 
structural failures of concern should be adequate to represent the 
conditions which are possible for the NPP under evaluation. 

Inspectors should refer to TAGs NS-TAST-GD-016 and NS-TAST-
GD-016017 for further guidance here. 

Assumptions on the reliability of passive systems / features are 
substantiated by appropriate and sufficient analysis covering the full 
range of fault and accident conditions for which they are required and 
by appropriate tests. The supporting evidence is available. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 43 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The methodology used for the estimation of failure probabilities for 
computer-based systems is transparent and meets industry-accepted 
practices. 

 

The analysis of the software reliability carried out by the dutyholder 
has identified the influencing factors that affect the quality of the 
software. The results of these analyses have been taken into account 
in the reliability calculation in a transparent manner. 

If the software system has been separated into parts that are treated 
individually in the reliability analysis, the dependencies between the 
various parts are addressed explicitly. 

The reliability analysis of the computer-based hardware is 
documented.  

Any self-checking built into the systems is taken into account in an 
adequate manner. 

The dependencies between diverse software systems are dealt with 
explicitly. 

Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-046 for further guidance on 
computer-based systems. 

A list of all the basic events that represent random component failures 
together with their parameter estimates is included. 

 

Each parameter estimate is represented by a mean value and a 
statistical representation of its uncertainty.  

This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. 

The descriptions of events that represent unavailabilities due to 
testing and maintenance (planned and unplanned) in the data 
analysis task are fully consistent with the unavailability events 
modelled in the system fault trees. 

The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. 

For cases where generic data has been used, a justification is 
provided. 

Assumptions regarding unavailability time are stated and are 
reasonable. 

Use of facility-specific data is traceable to existing records. 

Justification is provided that the time span of the facility-specific data 
used in the PSA is sufficient to obtain realistic estimates of the 
unavailabilities. 

The probabilities assigned to events that represent configurations not 
observed during the data collection period are reasonable best 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-2.6.3  Unavailabilities Due to Testing and Maintenance  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 44 of 81 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

estimates. 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

The calculation of unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance 
(planned and unplanned) is correct and applicable for the operational 
state of the facility to which they are applied. 

A list of all the basic events that represent unavailabilities due to 
testing and maintenance (planned and unplanned) together with their 
parameter estimates is included.  

Each parameter estimate is represented by a mean value and a 
statistical representation of its uncertainty.  

This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. 

Table A1-2.6.4  Common Cause Failures (CCFs) 

The approach selected for the CCF basic event modelling and 
analysis is justified.  

The method chosen for CCF parameter estimation is transparent and 
meets good international practice. 

The approach selected for the CCF modelling and analysis is detailed 
enough to adequately represent all levels of redundancy provided for 
in the specific facility design and to obtain appropriate CCF parameter 
estimates for such levels of redundancy. 

The approach selected for modelling CCFs addresses both intra-
system and inter-system CCF events. 

The CCF event names and definitions are the same as those used in 
the fault tree models. 

The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. 

The applicability of the CCF data sources used is justified.  

If a screening approach has been adopted to narrow down the 
number of detailed analysis to be performed, the screening criteria 
used is stated. The screening values for the CCF model parameters 
are justified.  

If generic CCF parameters are used, the reasons why these values 
are considered appropriate are clear. Evidence is provided that the 
component boundaries, failure modes and failure root causes are 
consistent with those assumed in the generic data sources.  

If CCF evaluation has been performed using a pseudo-facility-specific 
database for which industry-wide data has been reinterpreted for the 
specific conditions of the NPP under evaluation, the analysis of NPP-
specific defences against CCFs relative to those expected for the 
facility from which the data were originally taken is traceable and 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 45 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

appropriate.    

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Table A1-2.7  Analysis of Hazards  

Table A1-2.7.1  General 

If CCF raw data or information available internationally is used (e.g. 
data from the International Common Cause Failure Data Exchange, 
ICDE, project), its applicability is justified and the way in which the 
data or information is used is transparent. 

For cases where expert-judgement has been used for CCF parameter 
estimation, a justification is provided that no better source of data is 
available.  

The expert judgement process is transparent and robust and the 
outcome of the process is reasonable. Error factors are assigned 
commensurate to the uncertainty in the process. 

The quantification of all the CCF events is transparent and has been 
done in accordance with the CCF method/s selected. No errors are 
apparent.  

A list of all the CCF events, together with their parameter estimates is 
included. Each CCF parameter estimate is represented by a mean 
value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is 
traceable to the supporting analyses. 

The analysis of hazards starts from a complete list of internal and 
external (natural and man-made) hazards. 

The approach and criteria for the screening of hazards are auditable 
and justified.  

The reasons why the hazards selected for further analysis are 
applicable to the NPP under evaluation are included.  

The reasons why the hazards excluded from the analysis are not 
applicable to the NPP under evaluation are clear and justified. 

The frequencies and magnitude of all hazards selected for analysis 
are identified.  

The hazard impact analysis (as a function of the magnitude of the 
hazard if appropriate) is auditable and covers possible initiating 
events, damage to equipment and structures, and impact on human 
performance.  

The hazard impact analysis has been undertaken using an adequate 
method and is auditable. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The hazard analyses reflect facility-specific and site-specific features 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 46 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

appropriately. 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Specific modifications made to the internal events PSA models (event 
trees and fault trees) and parameters (e.g. HEPs), or any new models 
and parameters developed to analyse the risk associated with the 
hazard under evaluation are auditable. 

Tables A1-2.7.2, A1-2.7.3 and A1-2.7.4 provide specific expectations 
when assessing PSA for internal fires, internal flooding and seismic 
events. This guidance may also be applied by inspectors assessing 
PSA for other types of internal or external hazard, provided care is 
taken to ensure its applicability.   

Table A1-2.7.2  Analysis of Internal Fires 

The method selected for the analysis of internal fires is justified.  

The approach chosen is sufficiently detailed to allow a realistic 
estimation of the fire risk and the identification of specific strengths 
and vulnerabilities.  

Evidence that walk-downs have been conducted is included and 
documented in detail (since fire risk analyses can only be realistic 
when supported by local walk-downs). The link between the 
information compiled during the walk-downs and the various aspects 
of the Fire PSA is apparent throughout. 

General assumptions of the fire analysis are stated and properly 
justified. 

If screening processes are undertaken during the various steps of the 
Fire PSA to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be performed, 
the qualitative and quantitative criteria applied for screening fire 
compartments are stated.  

The qualitative and quantitative screening criteria are adequate to 
ensure that the risk from individually screened-out scenarios and their 
cumulative contribution to the risk (in terms of contributions to the 
frequencies of core damage and significant releases) are acceptably 
low.  

Assumptions made in support of the initial quantification of fire 
compartments for the purpose of quantitative screening are 
transparent (e.g. assumptions on the impact of fires on equipment, 
human reliability, etc) and adequate. 

The global boundary of the analysis is defined so that this includes all 
locations at the NPP relevant to the risk calculations (e.g. all areas of 
the facility associated with normal and emergency reactor operating 
plant and support systems, with power production, areas associated 
with a sister unit containing shared equipment etc).  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 47 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The Fire PSA is based upon a subdivision of the NPP into well-
defined compartments with non-combustible barriers (i.e. which 
substantially confine the heat and products of combustion associated 
with a fire). In cases where the barriers are not fire-rated, these are 
identified and addressed in the inter-compartment analysis.   

Details of the compartmentalisation of the facility are transparent and 
include a description of the partitioning elements or features which 
have been assumed.  

A list of all compartments is included using a consistent identification 
scheme.  

Up-to-date drawings or references showing compartment boundaries 
are available.  

The process to identify essential equipment has identified all 
equipment whose failure or mal-operation will cause an initiating 
event or will adversely impact credited functions or operator actions. 
The location of this equipment, together with its normal, desired and 
failed positions on loss of services are identified.  

Established procedures are in place and implemented for evaluating 
circuits and selecting cables required to support the operation of 
essential equipment. 

Equipment circuits and cables required to support the credited 
functionality of essential equipment are identified.   

All potentially impacting power supplies are identified. This may 
include power supplies not evaluated in the internal events PSA. For 
example, the power supply to a normally closed valve which is 
required to remain in position and which would remain closed on loss 
of power would have been excluded from the fault trees for internal 
events. However, these power supplies need to be identified for the 
analysis of internal fires, since a fire may lead to spurious 
energisation and opening of the valve. 

Cable routing information (including associated equipment, cable IDs, 
raceways, locations etc) is stored in a database.  This information 
should be readily retrievable and kept up-to-date. 

If a first qualitative screening of fire compartments is undertaken, the 
details of this are transparent.  

The screening has been performed in accordance with established 
criteria.  

A list of all compartments screened-in is included.  This list includes 
all compartments that could make a potential contribution to the risk 
from fire. 

Descriptions of all fire compartments qualitatively screened-in are 
available. The descriptions include information on equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 48 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

allocation, potential fire sources and targets, fire load, passive 
protection, detection and suppression equipment, fire spreading paths 
(e.g. failed barriers or ventilation ducts and fire dampers) and other 
information necessary for the analysis, such as the control 
programmes for combustible and ignition sources for the specific 
compartment.    

Evaluation of fire frequencies has been performed for all the 
compartments qualitatively screened-in. 

The method for the calculation of fire frequencies, including the input 
data and information used, is clear.  

Generic and NPP-specific fire history information is used to establish 
fire frequencies associated with individual fire source types. The use 
of data from generic sources and facility-specific sources is justified 
and transparent.  

If fire severity is used as a criterion to screen generic and NPP-
specific events from frequency evaluations, then this should be 
transparent and justified. 

NPP-specific fire characteristics (such as the type and number of fire 
ignition sources and evaluation of transient combustibles) are used to 
apportion the expected influence on the likelihood of ignition in 
specific fire compartments in a transparent and adequate manner. 
Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific information are only 
made for NPPs not yet built and when used, are identified explicitly.  

Fire suppression is not taken into account in the calculation of fire 
frequencies. 

The calculation of fire frequencies for all fire compartments is 
documented explicitly. No errors are apparent.  

A list of all the compartments together with their fire frequencies is 
included. Each fire frequency is represented by a mean value and a 
statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the 
supporting analyses. 

If a quantitative screening of fire compartments is undertaken, the 
details of this are transparent.  

The screening has been performed in accordance with established 
criteria.  

A list of all compartments with an indication of whether they have 
been quantitatively screened-out (and the reason why), or screened-
in (retained for detailed compartment analysis) is included. 

Detailed analysis has been performed for all the compartments 
quantitatively screened-in.  

The fire scenario (or scenarios) associated with each compartment is 
properly characterised in terms of source, propagation, detection, 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 49 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

human response and damage:  

MET? 

  For  each  compartment,  details  of  the  specific  fire  sources  and 
targets are transparent. Evidence that all potential ignition sources 
have been addressed is provided. 

  The  analysis  of 

is 
transparent.  Evidence  is  provided  that  the  fire  model  used  to 
analyse fire growth has been validated and verified. 

fire  growth  within  each  compartment 

  The analysis of fire impact in each fire compartment is transparent 

and takes into account: 

  Equipment  damaged  in  the  compartment  by  flame,  plume, 

ceiling jet, hot gases and radiant heat. 

  Electrical  faults  (open  circuits,  shorts  to  ground,  short  circuits 
and  hot  shorts)  and  their  impact,  e.g.,  loss  of  equipment 
function,  spurious  actuation  of  equipment  (e.g.,  undesired 
reconfiguration of valves or actuation of standby systems), loss 
and / or false signals and indications. 

  Explosions  and  their  impact,  including  high-energy  arcing 

faults. 

  Collapse of structures and their impact. 

  Missiles and their impact. 

  Smoke and heat effects and their propagation to neighbouring 

compartments. 

 

Identification  of  initiating  events  in  each  compartment  as  the 
result of the fire. 

  For each compartment, a fire progression tree (or equivalent) has 
been  developed  that  shows  the  fire  source,  defined  fire  growing 
stages,  success  /  failure  of  fire  suppression  before  reaching  a 
given  damage  stage  or  triggering  of  an  initiating  event.  The  end 
points  of  these  analyses  are  one  or  more  fire  damage  states  for 
each  compartment  with  associated  frequencies.  These  are  taken 
forward for quantification. 

  The  reliability  of  the  various  fire  protection  measures  (both  in 
is 
terms  of  equipment  as  well  as  human  performance) 
substantiated. 

For compartments where more than one fire scenario has been 
identified, clear and unambiguous identification of the various fire 
scenarios in the compartment is included. Individual analyses for the 
separate fire scenarios in the compartment is provided (the above 
bullets also apply to individual scenarios). 

In cases where compartments have been further divided into sub-
compartments for the detailed analysis, the rationale for this is 
transparent and details of this are documented explicitly. The design 
features and the automatic and manual actions that prevent fire 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 50 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

propagation between sub-compartments are identified explicitly. 
Adequate justification of the effectiveness of these measures is 
provided. Individual analyses for the separate sub-compartments is 
provided (the above bullets also apply to individual sub-
compartments). 

The analysis of inter-compartment fire propagation is documented 
explicitly. 

 

The requirements listed above for fire modelling of single 
compartments are applied to the modelling of multi-compartment 
scenarios. 

Evidence is provided that passive fire barriers credited for preventing 
inter-compartment propagation (in the absence of suppression 
activities) are adequately rated and properly installed and maintained. 

The effectiveness and reliability of any active fire barrier (e.g. damper, 
suppression system) is explicitly addressed in the fire risk model and 
the risk contribution associated with its failure is evaluated. 

Details of the fire barrier and propagation analysis (barrier penetration 
analysis) are transparent.   

Scenarios involving two or more compartments are identified and 
characterised explicitly. Screening criteria applied to multi-
compartment analysis are consistent with the single compartment 
qualitative criteria.   

Multi-compartment scenarios which cannot be screened-out are 
carried onto the next stages of the Fire PSA.  

Details of the accident sequence modelling and quantification for 
each identified scenario are transparent.  In particular: 

 

  The  most  onerous  initiating  event  has  been  selected  to  be  the 
basis for the quantification of each fire scenario. The rationale for 
this selection is clear. 

  The internal events PSA model has been suitably modified so as 
to be capable of representing fire-induced equipment failures and 
mal-operations  or  degraded  human  errors  in  combination  with 
non-fire-related, random failures. For example potential failures or 
combinations of failures may have been neglected on the grounds 
of  low  probability  in  the  internal  events  analysis,  which  may  be 
significant in the event of a fire. 

  Details  of  the  human  reliability  analysis  in  fire  scenarios  are 
auditable.  The  impact  of  specific  actions  that  operators  may  take 
in  accordance  with  post  fire  procedures,  or  erroneously  due  to 
spurious  indications  following  a  fire,  which  may  degrade  credited 
PSA  functions,  have  been  modelled  appropriately.  The  impact  of 
fire  on  human  performance,  for  example  in  terms  of  potential 
enhanced  stress,  accessibility 
in 
scenarios  of  CCR  abandonment),  etc,  is  analysed  fully  and 

local  actuations  (e.g. 

for 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 51 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

transparently. The HRA for fire scenarios is adequate. 

  The  quantitative  and  qualitative  results  of  the  quantification  of 

each fire scenario are included.  

  The  results  of  the  Fire  PSA  also  include  an  estimate  of  the  core 
damage  and  significant  release  frequency  arising  from  the  set  of 
compartments screened-out from the analysis. 

Table A1-2.7.3  Analysis of Internal Flooding 

The approach to Flooding PSA adopted is sufficiently detailed to allow 
a realistic estimation of the risk from flooding and the identification of 
specific strengths and vulnerabilities.  

Evidence that walk-downs have been conducted is included and 
documented in detail (since flooding risk analyses can only be 
realistic when supported by local walk-downs). The link between the 
information compiled during the walk-downs and the various aspects 
of the Flooding PSA is apparent throughout. 

General assumptions of the flooding analysis are explicitly stated and 
properly justified. 

If screening processes are undertaken during the various steps of the 
Flooding PSA to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be 
performed, the qualitative and quantitative criteria applied for 
screening flood compartments are stated.  

The qualitative and quantitative screening criteria are adequate to 
ensure that the risk from individually screened-out scenarios and their 
cumulative contribution to the risk (in terms of contributions to the 
frequencies of core damage and significant releases) are acceptably 
low. 

Assumptions made in support of the initial quantification of flood 
compartments for the purpose of quantitative screening are 
transparent (e.g., assumptions on the impact of floods on equipment, 
human reliability, etc) and adequate. 

The global boundary of the analysis is defined so that this includes all 
locations at the NPP relevant to the risk calculations (e.g. all areas of 
the facility associated with normal and emergency reactor operating 
plant and support systems, with power production, areas associated 
with a sister unit containing shared equipment etc.). 

The Flooding PSA is based upon the subdivision of the NPP into well-
defined compartments (physically separate areas where flood is 
generally viewed as independent of other areas in terms of impact).  

Details of the compartmentalization of the facility are available 
including physical barriers (walls, floors, bunds etc), mitigating 
features (sumps, drains) adjacent compartments and propagation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 52 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

paths (open hatches, etc).  

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A list of all compartments showing compartment boundaries is 
included. Up-to-date drawings or references to these are included. 

Descriptions of the content of all flood compartments are available. 
The descriptions include information on all equipment susceptible to 
flood located in each of compartment, the minimum water volume 
needed to affect water-sensitive equipment by immersion / splashing, 
internal flood barriers and spray shields, potential flood sources and 
types (e.g. high energy steam pipework), automatic and manual flood 
detection and isolation means, possible flood effects in each 
compartment (e.g. initiating events, damage to safety equipment) and 
in compartments to which the flooding may propagate, etc. 

The susceptibility of each type of component appearing in the PSA to 
flood-induced failure mechanisms is identified and justified (e.g. 
submergence, jet impingement, pipe whip, humidity, condensation, 
temperature) 

For each flood source, the propagation path from the source 
compartment to the point of accumulation is identified, including the 
potential for structural failures of walls, doors, back flow device 
failures, HVAC ducts, etc. 

Details of the first qualitative screening of flood compartments and 
flood sources are auditable.  

The screening has been performed in accordance with established 
criteria.  

A list of all compartments screened-in is included. This includes all 
compartments that could make a potential contribution to the risk from 
internal flooding. 

Evaluation of flooding frequencies has been performed for all the 
compartments qualitatively screened-in. 

Generic and NPP-specific flood history information is used to 
establish flood frequencies and severities associated with individual 
flood source types. The use of data from generic sources and NPP-
specific sources is justified and transparent.  

The method for the calculation of flood frequencies, including the 
input data and information used, is clear.  

For each compartment, the nature of possible flood causes is 
identified, e.g. maintenance activities, pipe breaks, expansion joint 
breaks, etc. Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific information 
are only made for NPPs not yet built and when used are identified 
explicitly.  

For each compartment, the location and characterisation of flood 
sources, describing e.g. the system that is the source of the flooding, 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 53 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

source location, flow rate maximal flood volume and flood frequency, 
are transparent. Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific 
information are only made for NPPs not yet built and when used are 
identified explicitly.  

Similar flood cases are adequately grouped in the modelled 
scenarios. All the assumptions made in this process are transparent. 

The calculation of flood frequencies for all identified flooding 
scenarios is documented explicitly. No errors are apparent.  

A list of all the identified flooding scenarios, together with their 
frequencies, is included. Each frequency is represented by a mean 
value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is 
traceable to the supporting analyses. 

 

Details of the quantitative screening of flood scenarios are 
transparent.  

The screening has been performed in accordance with established 
criteria.  

A list of all flood scenarios with indication of whether they have been 
quantitatively screened out (and the reason why), or screened in 
(retained for detailed analysis) is included. 

 

 

Detailed analysis has been performed for all the flood scenarios 
quantitatively screened-in, including:  

 

 

  For  each  compartment  where  a  flooding  scenario  has  been 
identified, the rate at which a flood could develop is provided. 

  The equipment which is assumed to be damaged by water spray, 
jet  impingement,  pipe  whip  etc.  due  to  the  flood  source  is 
identified. 

  Flood  effects 

to  e.g.  equipment 
the  compartment  due 
immersion,  humidity  and  temperature  are  identified.  These  cover 
both initiating events and equipment damage. 

in 

  Adverse  effects  in  compartments  affected  by  the  propagation  of 

floods are identified.   

  For  each 

flooding  scenario,  a 

tree  (or 
equivalent)  has  been  developed  that  identifies  flood  progression 
stages reached (leading to an initiating event or to damage to any 
relevant  system)  depending  on  the  success  or  failure  of  flood 
isolation actions. 

flood  progression 

 

Indications,  events  and  any  other  cues  which  can  provide  flood 
symptoms and allow for flood detection are identified explicitly.  

  Actions needed for flood isolation before a given flood progression 

stage is reached are described explicitly.  

  The reliability of the flooding protection measures (both in terms of 
equipment as well as human performance) are substantiated. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 54 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

MET? 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

Details of the accident sequence modelling and quantification for 
each identified scenario are transparent.  In particular: 

  The initiating event identified for each flood scenario is justified. 

  The modifications made to the internal event PSA event trees and 
fault  trees  (and  any  new  models  developed)  to  calculate  the 
probability  of  core  damage  and  significant  release  at  various 
evaluated  progression  stages,  taking  into  account  the  impact  of 
the  flood  on  safety  systems  and  operating  crew  actions  are 
transparent. The resulting models are correct. 

  Details of the human reliability analysis for flooding scenarios are 
transparent.  The  flood-related  factors  that  may  influence  human 
performance are identified explicitly. The analysis is complete and 
transparent. The HRA for flooding scenarios is adequate. 

  The  quantitative  and  qualitative  results  of  the  quantification  of 

each flooding scenario are included.  

  The  results  of  the  Flooding  PSA  also  include  an  estimate  of  the 
core  damage  frequency  and  significant  release  frequency  arising 
from  the  set  of  flooding  compartments  /  scenarios  screened-out 
from the analysis. 

Table A1-2.7.4  Seismic Analysis  

 

 

 

 

 

The approach used to evaluate and represent the hazard from 
earthquakes is described and appropriate 

The seismic hazard analysis is documented in detail. 

The assumptions and models used for aspects such as the 
characterisation of sources and attenuation relationships are clearly 
identified. 

All the values for the parameters used in the model are identified and 
the way the final hazard curves have been constructed is auditable. 

The mean curve for the site is represented together with its 
uncertainty bounds. This is traceable to the underlying analyses. 

All the references to historical data used are identified and auditable. 

The approach used to evaluate the impact of earthquakes on the NPP 
structures and components is described and appropriate. 

All the equipment that requires analysis of the probability of failure 
against earthquake magnitudes is identified, i.e. all equipment 
required to trip, shutdown, cool and monitor the reactor, all structures 
whose failure could hamper core cooling, and all equipment and 
structures required to mitigate severe accidents or whose failure 
could impact releases (Level 2 PSA), etc. 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 55 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

This list is traceable to safety case / internal events PSA sources. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

If the number of components for which detailed fragility analysis has 
been performed has been limited using some type of screening, the 
screening criteria is defined and is adequate. 

The screening analysis is traceable. 

The design parameters used for the derivation of fragilities of 
equipment and structures are identified. 

The method used to evaluate seismic fragilities is described. 

If different methods have been to evaluate the fragilities for different 
components or structures, the methods lead to consistent results.  

The fragility analysis is auditable. 

The results of the screening analysis of relay and contactor chatter for 
the safety systems are included with a list of relays and associated 
fragilities included in the final model.  

The initiating events arising from the full range of earthquakes are 
identified. 

If the number of earthquake-induced initiating events considered in 
the Seismic PSA quantification has been limited using some type of 
screening, the screening criteria is defined and is adequate.  

The screening analysis is traceable. 

The potential for secondary hazards, e.g. earthquake-induced fires 
and floods has been analysed systematically during the seismic walk-
down and the results are auditable. 

The way in which the seismic failures and successes and random 
component failures have been combined is traceable.  

If seismic damage states have been developed, each of them 
correctly represents the frequency of the associated seismic failures 
by the mathematically correct inclusion of the combination of failure 
and success paths. 

Any modifications to the event and fault tree logic models to 
incorporate the impact of earthquakes on the NPP are auditable and 
correct. 

The potential for the correlation of seismically-induced component or 
structural failures has been addressed and any assumptions made 
regarding the correlation are identified and justified.  

The Human Reliability Analysis has been revisited to address the 
operator response following the seismic events of concern. Details of 
this analysis are auditable. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 56 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

The quantitative and qualitative results of the quantification are 
included. 

Sensitivity, uncertainty and importance analyses are provided. 

Table A1-2.8  Low Power and Shutdown Modes 

Note: The expectations listed in the tables A1-2.1 to A1-2.7 above are 
also applicable to the Low Power and Shutdown parts of the PSA. 
Table A1- 2.8 therefore only deals with additional expectations 
applicable specifically to this part of the analysis. 

The identification of the Plant Operational States (POS) during non-
full power modes is justified.  

There are no gaps and / or overlaps between the POS addressed in 
the Low power and Shutdown PSA and those covered in the PSA for 
full power. 

All the characteristics considered for the identification of possible 
stages during low power and shutdown (pre-POS) are clear. No 
important characteristic is missing. 

The grouping of pre-POS into the final list of POS is justified and 
visible. The grouping is adequately justified. 

A table listing all the POS with their characteristics is included. The 
information about all the POS’ characteristics is presented and 
complete.  

Information about plant configuration (decay heat removal method, 
cooling circuit configuration, etc) in each POS, frontline system 
availability in each POS, length of time in each POS, assumed decay 
heat levels is presented. 

The definition and characterisation of each POS is traceable to 
facility-specific information. 

The analysis of initiating events for each POS is transparent. 

The analysis of initiating events has considered events based on 
plant failures, those triggered by operator interactions and those 
caused by internal and external hazards. The details of the analysis 
are transparent. 

A systematic examination of NPP procedures for changing 
configurations, equipment testing and maintenance procedures has 
been carried out to identify potential human errors during the 
execution of such normal procedures that are, or may lead, to 
initiating events. The analysis process is transparent. 

A table showing the initiating event groups defined and their 
applicability to each POS is presented. No errors are apparent 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 57 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The derivation of the frequency of the initiating events is specific for 
each POS (i.e. it has taken into consideration the specific 
characteristics of each POS). The analysis is transparent. 

The models used to calculate IE frequencies are presented. 

The frequency of each initiating event is calculated on a per calendar 
year basis (so that the risks associated with each POS can be 
compared). Otherwise the units used are explained.  

If screening of combinations of initiating event groups / POS is 
undertaken to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be 
performed, the screening approach, criteria and process are clear and 
acceptable. The screening process does not lead to the removal of 
events that may be significant for the intended applications of the 
PSA. 

The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (or any other) analyses performed 
to support the determination of success criteria for the Low Power 
and Shutdown PSA are presented.   

The thermal-hydraulic analyses performed to support the 
determination of success criteria for the Low Power and Shutdown 
PSA have taken into consideration the specific characteristics of 
these operating modes, e.g. reactor coolant system water inventory, 
steam generator availability, core inventory, decay heat curve. The 
boundary conditions used in these analyses are stated. 

The success criteria for the Low Power and Shutdown PSA are 
developed on a realistic basis. 

Event trees have been developed for each combination initiating 
event-POS that has been screened-in.  

System models have been developed taking into consideration the 
specific characteristics of each POS. Details of this are transparent. 

References to all maintenance procedures and work plans which are 
used to define the event tree boundary conditions and system status 
modelled in the fault trees are explicitly stated. 

The HRA method selected can adequately represent the aspects of 
the NPP shutdown relevant to human reliability which may be 
different to when the reactor is operating at power, e.g. long time 
windows for operator actuation, status of procedural guidance and 
training, familiarity with shutdown accident transients, levels of 
supervision, availability of indications / status of the control room, 
difficulties in diagnosing events, increased workload, etc. 

The HRA has considered all the aspects of the NPP shutdown 
relevant to human reliability mentioned above clearly and 
systematically.  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 58 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Specific aspects of the low power and shutdown modes that may 
affect the risk due to hazards (which may differ from when the reactor 
is operating at power) have been clearly and systematically 
addressed.  

 

Examples of specific aspects that inspectors should expect the PSA 
to address are: 

 

 

Internal  fires:  amount  of  hot  work;  additional  inventories  of 
combustible  materials  introduced  into  some  areas;  status  of 
automatic  fire  suppression  systems,  fire  barriers,  fire  doors  and 
penetration seals, etc. 

Internal flooding: temporary water systems and hose connections; 
different  plant  configurations  and  possibilities  of  valve 
misalignments  leading  to  flooding;  status  of  drainage  systems, 
doors  in  segregation  barriers  and  penetration  seals,  increased 
possibility of maintenance errors leading to floods, etc. 

  Dropped  loads:  number  of  heavy  loads  lifted  during  maintenance 
outages;  potential  for  dropped  loads  to  directly  affect  spent  fuel 
during the refuelling, etc.  

Table A1-2.9  Uncertainty analyses, Quantification and Interpretation of the Level 1 
PSA Results 

Table A1-2.9.1  Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analyses 

 

 

 

The sources of uncertainty in the Level 1 PSA are identified explicitly. 

 

Suitable methods are chosen to address the various types of 
uncertainty, to evaluate their impact on the results of the PSA and to 
interpret their significance. 

Sensitivity studies have been carried out to evaluate the risk 
significance of assumptions.  

The sensitivity studies address the effects of key assumptions and 
combinations of assumptions.  

The sensitivity studies and their results are transparent. 

Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been 
estimated. 

Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been 
propagated through the models to generate uncertainty distributions 
for the results of the Level 1 PSA.  

The means resulting from the uncertainty propagation are the values 
that have been compared against the relevant numerical criteria 
(rather than using the point estimate means which result from a 
simple arithmetic evaluation of the PSA cutsets). 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 59 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Based on the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations, an 
understanding has been gained of which parametric and modelling 
uncertainties most contribute to the overall uncertainty of the results 
of the Level 1 PSA. This analysis is transparent. 

The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations demonstrate 
that the overall conclusions obtained from the Level 1 PSA are still 
valid. 

Steps have been taken to reduce the most important uncertainties 
(and hence the uncertainties in the overall PSA results). These are 
explicitly described.  

Table A1-2.9.2  Quantification of the Level 1 PSA 

 

 

The results obtained from the quantification are reproducible: 

  The type of quantification and related approximations are explicitly 

stated. 

adequate.  

  The  cut-offs  used  for  the  quantification  are  explicitly  stated  and 

  Any minimal cutset editing performed is transparent.  

  A description of the way in which circular logic has been removed 
between  front  line  /  support  and  support  /  support  system  fault 
trees if done within the quantification process is provided. 

 

 

Complete results of the quantification are provided. These include: 

 

  Minimal cutsets with numerical results and description of the basic 

events. 

  Lists  of  basic  events  and  associated  importance  measures,  as  a 
minimum fractional contributions (Fussell Vesely Importance) and 
risk increase factors (Risk Achievement Worth). 

  Lists  of  relevant  groups  of  components  or  basic  events  and 

associated importance functions as for basic events.  

 

 

Quantification has been carried out (and results provided) at different 
levels: 

 

  Level 1 PSA (for full power operation). 

  Level 1 PSA (for operation at low power and shutdown).  

Individual initiating event groups (event trees). 

Individual accident sequences (in the event trees). 

Individual hazards for power operation and non-power conditions. 

Individual  hazard  scenarios  for  power  operation  and  non-power 
conditions. 

  Total annual contribution from all NPP operations (power and non-

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 60 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

power) for all internal initiators and hazards and the breakdown of 
this for the different operational states. 

  The estimated level of risk associated with each operational state 

in order to support the ALARP arguments. 

A survey of the PSA results has been carried out by the dutyholder to 
confirm the correctness of the Level 1 PSA quantification. 

Table A1-2.9.3  Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 1 PSA Results 

A summary of the Level 1 PSA results is included in the PSA 
documentation.  

The summary of the Level 1 PSA results together with any 
accompanying discussions are sufficient for PSA and non-PSA 
specialists to get a clear understanding of how big the risk of core 
damage is, where this risk comes from and which are the most 
significant uncertainties.  

All vulnerabilities identified by the PSA are transparent. The corrective 
actions proposed to address these vulnerabilities are described 
explicitly.  The PSA has been used to support the optioneering 
analysis and details of this are auditable.  

An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed 
corrective actions is documented explicitly. This has been used as an 
input to assigning the level of priority of these proposals.  

A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective 
actions are captured, as appropriate, in the NPP design or design 
modification processes, in the NPP process for procedure 
development or modification, etc. 

A demonstration is included that the risk of core damage for the 
facility under evaluation is ALARP. 

The basis for the definition of LARGE RELEASE is presented and 
explained. 

The basis for the definition of LARGE EARLY RELEASE is presented 
and explained. 

If a design target for LARGE RELEASE FREQUENCY has been 
used, this is stated explicitly. 

If a design target for LARGE EARLY RELEASE FREQUENCY has 
been used, this is stated explicitly. 

The Level 2 PSA has been designed so that its output forms an 
adequate input to perform a Level 3 PSA. 

3. 

Table A1-3.  Level 2 PSA  

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 61 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Table A1-3.1  Interface between Level 1 and Level 2 PSA 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The entirety of the Level 1 PSA has been taken forward to the Level 2 
analysis (Internal initiating events, internal and external hazards for 
the reactor at power, low power and shutdown, and for the fuel route) 

The analysis of the interface between Level 1 and Level 2 PSA has 
addressed systematically all the attributes of the Level 1 core damage 
sequences that can affect the accident progression.   

The analysis has identified all attributes of the Level 1 core damage 
sequences that can affect the mode and timing of containment failure, 
containment bypass or affect the source term. Steps have been taken 
to give confidence that a complete set of attributes has been 
identified, including as appropriate, the investigation of attributes 
identified in other studies and justifications for inclusion or exclusion 
of features are presented. 

The analysis is performed in a way which, together with the Level 2 
model and the mechanism for transferring information between the 
two parts of the analysis, ensures that all dependencies between 
Level 1 core damage sequences and the Level 2 model (including 
event logic, system-related and human error dependencies) are 
correctly represented. 

The analysis is transparent.  

Based on the above, a complete set of Plant Damage States (PDS) is 
defined, each of which represents a set of core damage sequences 
with a unique expected severe accident progression and set of source 
term characteristics. 

The characterisation of each PDSs is clearly presented in terms of the 
attributes of the Level 1 sequences it represents and the status of 
each of these attributes. 

The identification and characterisation of PDSs is adequate.  

A sufficient number of PDS has been defined to avoid masking 
important ways of accident progression while ensuring a manageable 
scope of analysis. 

Any modification made to the original Level 1 PSA event trees to 
address Level 2 issues (features that can affect the accident 
progression but were not considered originally in the Level 1 PSA 
models), is clear.  

The models are correct. 

Relevant systems not already covered in the Level 1 PSA are 
analysed to the same specification and level of detail as the other 
systems included in the Level 1 PSA.  

All the dependencies are properly captured.  

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 62 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Relevant human failure events not already covered in the Level 1 
PSA are analysed to the same specification and level of detail as the 
HFEs included in the Level 1 PSA. 

The criteria used to group the (Level 1 - Level 2 interface) event tree 
sequences into the defined PDSs are identified explicitly and correct. 

The process of mapping the resulting accident sequences from the 
modified event trees to the relevant Pant Damage States is 
transparent.  

If the binning process (allocation of sequences to end state 
categories) is automated, an auditable record exists of this process.  

The identification and characterisation of PDSs is traceable in both 
directions, i.e. Level 1 cutset / sequence to PDS and PDS back to 
Level 1 sequence. No errors are identified in the grouping of accident 
sequences into the defined PDSs. 

Each PDS has been assigned a frequency equal to the summed 
frequency of all the sequences in the group. 

For the follow-up Level 2 analysis, each PDS is represented by the 
most onerous sequence. In general, if the PDS structure is a proper 
one, there should not be any significant differences in the sequences 
within a PDS, and therefore, the PDS representative sequence would 
be the one with the highest frequency. 

If a separate code is used for Level 2 PSA, the way in which the 
sequence or cutset definitions and frequencies from the Level 1 – 
Level 2 interface have been transferred to the Level 2 PSA is 
transparent.  

The code/s used for analysing the progression of severe accidents 
has / have been qualified for the design of the NPP under evaluation. 
For example, the computer model has been successfully used to 
simulate steady state operating behaviour and a variety of initiating 
events (such as unanticipated transients).  Alternatively, the code has 
been applied to experimental facilities or to other NPPs of similar 
design with equivalent fidelity. 

The code and inputs meet ONR quality expectations (e.g. as 
described in Table A1- 1.4 of this Appendix). The input data used by 
the code represents the facility in sufficient detail and with sufficient 
fidelity to provide the output required by the Level 2 PSA model. 

The code/s used include deterministic models for all known severe 
accident phenomena that could occur with high probability and have a 
first-order impact on the response to the postulated fault. 

The analytical models contained in the computer code have been 
sufficiently validated (both individually and collectively; i.e. against 

Table A1-3.2  Deterministic Accident Progression Analysis 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 63 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

separate effects and integral experimental measurements) to provide 
reasonable confidence in the calculated results. 

The codes have been used within their limit of applicability. 

Modelling options (if any) selected by the code user reflect ‘best-
practice’ recommendations of the code developers or a recognised 
and experienced user community. 

Deviations from best-practice choices of options are documented and 
justified. 

The modelling options available in the computer code are applied 
consistently throughout the calculations performed for different fault 
sequences. 

Differences in the codes, models or modelling options used (if any) 
are documented and justified. 

In cases where some of the severe accident phenomena have not 
been addressed directly via code calculations, the applicability of the 
sources of information used to address these phenomena is justified. 

No relevant and potentially important phenomena have been 
neglected or dismissed without an adequate technical justification. 

All the assumptions made are stated explicitly. 

All the assumptions made are justified, i.e. the rationale for choosing 
these assumptions and for rejecting alternatives is clear and 
reasonable. 

The way in which each assumption may bias the outcomes of the 
analysis is indicated, or the effect(s) of alternative, reasonable 
assumptions on the calculated results is demonstrated to be 
negligible. 

The accident progression analyses have been performed on a best-
estimate basis and are specific to the facility. 

In the absence of facility-specific details, all the assumptions 
regarding facility design and construction are stated. 

A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured 
to support the future design and construction. 

The accident scenarios selected as input to the accident progression 
calculations are appropriate and transparent throughout the various 
accident progression analyses.  

The accident scenarios selected as input to the accident progression 
calculations are consistent with the Level 1 PDS sequences (which 
are the starting point for the accident scenarios evaluated) and with 
the Level 2 event tree sequences to which they are applied. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 64 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

Assumptions made in the accident progression analyses regarding 
operator actions are consistent with the operator actions in the 
corresponding Level 2 PSA accident progression event tree 
sequences. 

The accident progression analyses are documented and traceable. 

The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset 
of the accident progression analyses. In these cases no significant 
errors have been found. 

The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative 
subset of accident progression analyses. In these cases, the results 
obtained are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder.    

Table A1-3.3  Containment Performance Analysis 

The method used for analysing the probability of failure of the 
containment (i.e. the method used for analysing the containment 
structural response) under different stress conditions caused by the 
severe accidents is transparent. 

The method is state-of-the-art and meets accepted industry 
standards. 

The code and inputs used for analysing containment structural 
integrity meet ONR quality expectations as described in Table A1-1.4 
of this Appendix. 

The input data used by the code represents the facility in sufficient 
detail and with sufficient fidelity to provide the quality of output 
required by the Level 2 PSA model. 

The models used to characterise the loss of containment integrity 
(e.g. the models used for thresholds and / or leak before break) are 
explicitly stated and justified. 

The way in which analysis of the failure of penetrations has been 
performed is transparent and adequate. 

The loads and combinations of loads studied are clear.  

The range of loads and combinations of loads addressed is adequate 
to represent the conditions of the severe accident sequences, which 
are possible for the facility under evaluation. Temperature effects are 
addressed and the assumptions made are consistent with the 
conditions arising in the accident sequences for which the results of 
the analysis are used. 

In the absence of facility-specific details, all the assumptions 
regarding containment geometry, construction and materials are 
transparent. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 65 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured 
to support the future design and construction. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The material properties assumed are realistic. 

A systematic review of the containment structure has been performed 
to identify plausible and credible failure modes. 

Failure criteria for containment structures are clearly defined. 

Uncertainties associated with the capacity of the containment under 
extreme loads have been identified explicitly. 

Uncertainties have been appropriately treated and the results of the 
analysis are presented in a form consistent with their use in the 
probabilistic accident progression models. ONR expectation is that 
the results of the structural analysis would be presented as 
probabilistic fragility curves, unless it has been justified that the 
uncertainties are small enough for the use of a bounding point-value 
structural capacity to be used. 

Any expert judgement used to derive the containment capacity and 
uncertainty parameters has been documented.  

The expert judgement process adopted is appropriate. 

The containment performance analyses are thoroughly documented 
and fully traceable. 

The approach used for the delineation of the severe accident 
sequences (accident progression event trees, APETs, or equivalent) 
is transparent. That is, the chronological progression of events can be 
traced either via graphical diagrams or an equivalent method, and the 
logical end-states of individual accident sequences (e.g., pathways 
through an event tree) are associated with a single, unique outcome 
(e.g. a release category). 

The Level 2 PSA code used to develop the APETs provides the 
necessary capability to support the modelling approach selected, e.g. 
the capability to handle multiple branches for a single event tree 
node, headings represented by models other than fault trees (e.g. 
event trees, user defined code), global variables (e.g. to allow 
tracking of hydrogen generation and combustion at different points in 
an accident sequence), etc.  

If the Level 2 PSA code does not provide the necessary capability to 
support all aspects of the probabilistic modelling approach selected, 
the way in which these aspects of the model have been handled in 
the quantification is clear. 

Table A1-3.4  Probabilistic Modelling Framework – Accident Progression Event 
Trees (APET) 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 66 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

An APET has been developed for each PDS. 

The APETs are clearly described (i.e. structure and headings). 

The phenomena addressed are clearly identified. All relevant 
phenomena significantly affecting the accident progression or source 
term magnitudes (as far as required to comply with table A1-3.5) have 
been included. The selection of phenomena for inclusion has followed 
a systematic process which addresses generic accident phenomena 
and specific plant issues, and no relevant phenomena have been 
neglected or dismissed without an adequate technical justification. 

The time frames depicted are transparent and organised in the 
correct order with proper treatment of chronological dependencies. 

When uncertainties are addressed via the APET structure, the way in 
which this has been done is transparent. 

All assumptions are described and justified. 

All simplifications (e.g. issues excluded from the APET) are described 
and justified. 

The dependencies between / among phenomena are explicitly 
identified and properly captured in the logic model and in the 
assignment of event probabilities. 

Dependencies within the Level 1 core damage sequences are 
adequately modelled. 

The structure of each APET, and associated event probabilities, are 
traceable to the underlying deterministic accident progressions 
analyses carried out to support their development. 

The APET includes HFEs for severe accident management actions. 
Table A1-.2.5 of this appendix applies for the assessment of these 
actions. 

The dependencies with the HFEs in the Level 1 PSA are identified 
and treated appropriately. 

Potential adverse effects of severe accident management actions are 
modelled. 

The method used to assign probabilities to the events of the APET is 
described. The approach selected is valid and is used to assign 
probabilities consistently throughout the Level 2 PSA.  In particular:  

  Event probabilities which represent random events (i.e. events 
representing  aleatory  or  stochastic  uncertainty,  such  as  those 
similar  to  the  ones  included  in  the  Level  1  PSA  models,  e.g., 
equipment  random  failures)  are  calculated  using  methods 
consistent with similar events in the Level 1 PSA. 

  Event  probabilities  which 

represent  uncertainty  about 
deterministic  outcomes  (i.e.  events  representing  so-called 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 67 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

epistemic  uncertainty,  such  as  the  likelihood  of  structural 
failure  due  to  temperature  and  pressure  loads  from  an 
energetic event) are assigned based on a clear and consistent 
to  assign  event 
method. 
probabilities,  the  rationale  for  numerical  values  chosen  is 
clearly described and applied consistently throughout the Level 
2 PSA. 

If  expert 

judgment 

is  used 

In cases where APET probability values represent uncertainty about 
deterministic outcomes, the analyses performed to generate have: 

 

 

Identified  the  relevance  of  the  defined  severe  accident  time 
frames and has taken this into account adequately 

  Used up-to-date information on accident phenomenology. 

  Justified the applicability of the sources of information used. 

  Used facility-specific information wherever possible. 

  Used  an  acceptable  analysis  method 

for  example, 
decomposition event trees, Monte Carlo simulation, or another 
method justified as adequate. 

- 

  Been performed in a transparent and consistent manner. 

APET drawings are included.  

Computer files for the APETs are provided. 

System design, operability and survivability modelling is described 
clearly and justified. 

In cases where the environment or operating conditions for system(s) 
exceed their design or qualification limits, assumptions on system 
design, operability and survivability are explicitly stated.  

A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured 
to support the future system design, installation and qualification. 

 

 

 

Table A1-3.5  Source Term Analysis 

The parameters that influence fission product release, retention and 
transport through each of the major barriers to the environment are 
identified explicitly. 

The attributes that define the characteristics of the radiological 
releases and potential off-site consequences are identified explicitly. 

The attributes required in order to perform a Level 3 PSA are 
identified explicitly, e.g. magnitude of radionuclides, isotopic 
composition, release timing, height and frequency of the release, 
physical and chemical characteristics of the release, heat content of 
the release (plume), etc. 

Based on the above, an adequate set of release categories (RCs) has 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 68 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

been defined and justified, each one representing a different way of 
radiological release.  

The time periods considered for the release and the rationale for their 
choice are transparent and adequate. 

The characterisation of each RC is clear. All the attributes relevant to 
each RC are identified explicitly. 

The identification and characterisation of RCs is adequate.  

A sufficient number of RCs has been defined to avoid masking 
important source terms while maintaining a manageable scope for the 
analysis. 

The method or criteria used to group the severe accident sequences 
from the APETs into the defined RCs is stated explicitly and is 
justified. 

The process of mapping the resulting severe accident sequences 
from the APETs to the relevant RCs is transparent.  

If the binning process (allocation of sequences to end state 
categories) is automated, an auditable record exists of this process.   

No errors are identified in the grouping of severe accident sequences 
into the defined RCs. 

Each RC has been assigned a frequency equal to the summed 
frequency of all the severe accident sequences in the group. 

Each RC provides an adequate representation of the individual 
sequences within the group.  

The code and inputs meet ONR quality expectations as described in 
Table A1-1.4 of this Appendix.  

The modelling method/s used to perform source term analysis are 
clear.  

The radionuclide grouping scheme used for the source term analysis 
is consistent with current state-of-the-art practice. 

All the assumptions made to obtain source terms are described and 
justified. 

The computer code calculations used as the basis for estimating 
facility-specific source terms for selected accident sequences are 
documented.  

If there are cases where facility-specific computer code calculations 
were not performed, the method by which source terms have been 
estimated is described and justified. Also the relationship between the 
deterministic accident progression analyses and deterministic source 
term analyses are clearly described and justified. 

 

 

 

 

 

A set of sensitivity analyses has been performed to explore the 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 69 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

impact of the assumptions made in the source terms analysis. 

The source term analyses are thoroughly documented and fully 
traceable. 

The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset 
of the source term analyses. In these cases no significant errors have 
been found. 

The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative 
subset of source term analyses. In these cases, the results obtained 
are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder.    

Table A1-3.6 Quantification of the Level 2 PSA 

The quantification process is adequately documented and 
reproducible. 

The quantification setup, settings and any approximations are 
adequately documented. The quantification results are reproducible. 

Any cut-offs used for the quantification are documented and 
adequate. 

Any minimal cutset editing or other post-processing performed is 
transparent and reproducible. 

To the extent relevant, descriptions are provided of the way in which 
circular logic has been removed for any systems modified or 
developed for the Level 2 PSA. 

Complete results of the quantification are provided, including: 

  Minimal cutsets with numerical results and description of the basic 

events. 

  Basic event importance measures. 

 

Importances for relevant groups of components or basic events. 

  Contribution of significant accident sequences to the Release 

Categories and risk metrics. 

Results are summarised at different levels (to the extent consistent 
with the scope of the PSA): 

  Full power operation 

  Low power and shutdown 

 

Individual initiating event groups 

  Hazards during power operation and non-power conditions 

  Plant operational states 

  Point in time risk for each operational state (to support ALARP) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 70 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A review of results has been carried out to confirm their correctness. 

A review of why the risk profile is similar or different to that of similar 
plants has been performed, to the extent practicable given the 
availability of results for similar plants. 

The treatment of success branches is sufficiently accurate and the 
approach taken is justified, especially for headings where failure 
probabilities are large. 

The summated total RC frequency (including RCs with minimal or no 
release) has been compared to the Level 1 CDF. A justification is 
provided that the magnitude of any differences is acceptable. Any 
significant differences are explained. 

Uncertainties are propagated to generate uncertainty bounds on the 
RC results and on the values of the risk metrics generated. 

Uncertainty propagation includes both Level 1 and Level 2 
uncertainties. 

The Level 2 and Level 1 models may use event probabilities which 
represent random events (sometimes referred to as aleatory events) 
and event probabilities that represent uncertainties about 
deterministic outcomes (sometimes referred to as epistemic events).  
The distinction between these types of events is recognised in the 
uncertainty propagation and uncertainty distributions are assigned 
following a method that is appropriate to the type of event. 

For aleatory events, the method used to generate uncertainty 
distributions is consistent with the methods applied in the Level 1. 
Deviations from or inconsistencies with the Level 1 methodology are 
described and justified. 

For epistemic events, the method used to generate uncertainty 
distributions used in for the uncertainty propagation takes account of 
the uncertainty information and modelling used to generate the mean 
values for those events. The assigned distribution is consistent with 
that modelling. 1/0 (or double delta) sampling (for binary or multiple 
branchings) is used where appropriate; otherwise the approach used 
is explained, justified and mathematically sound. 

Where different events modelled in the Level 2 PSA depend on 
shared or similar parameters, the effect of the correlation introduced 
by these parameters is modelled unless a justification is provided that 
the correlation is not significant or is adequately bounded. If the latter 
bounding approach is used, a justification is provided that the realism 
of the overall models is not compromised. 

Table A1-3.7  Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 2 PSA Results 

 

The Level 2 PSA results are clearly and thoroughly presented in the 
PSA documentation.  

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 71 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations provide a 
high degree of confidence that the overall conclusions obtained from 
the Level 2 PSA are valid. 

A summary of the Level 2 PSA results together with accompanying 
discussions is included. This summary is sufficient for PSA and non-
PSA specialists to get a clear understanding of the risk of the defined 
categories of radioactive releases, where this risk comes from and 
which are the most significant uncertainties.  A clear explanation is 
included of why the results of the Level 2 PSA are considered valid 
despite the identified uncertainties.  

All vulnerabilities identified by the Level 2 PSA are documented 
explicitly. The corrective actions proposed to address the 
vulnerabilities are clear.  

An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed 
corrective actions has been carried out and is documented explicitly. 
This has been used as the basis for assigning a level of priority to 
these proposals.  

A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective 
actions are captured, as appropriate, in the NPP design or design 
modification processes, or in the NPP process for procedure 
development or modification, etc. 

A demonstration that the risk of radioactive release for the NPP is 
ALARP is included. 

4. 

Table A1-4.  Level 3 PSA 

Table A1-4.1  Assessment of the Level 3 analysis 

The interfaces between the output of the Level 2 PSA and the input to 
the Level 3 PSA (approach and code/s used) are consistent.  

The end-point(s) of the Level 3 PSA are unambiguously stated and 
the scope is clearly defined. 

The range of consequences addressed by the Level 3 PSA and the 
way in which these consequences are to be presented are identified. 
These are adequate to allow comparison against the relevant targets 
in the SAPs 

The calculation methods used in the Level 3 PSA are auditable and 
reflect the current state of knowledge. These include: 

  The  method(s)  used  to  address  the  relevant  phenomena  and 
pathways,  e.g.  for  calculation  of  atmospheric  dispersion, 
surface  deposition,  re-suspension,  migration  through  food 
chains, etc. 

  The  method(s)  used  for  the  calculation  of  dose  (external 
from 

irradiation, 

inhalation, 

irradiation 

irradiation 

from 
 
 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 72 of 81 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ingestion). 

  The  method(s)  used  for  the  calculation  of  health  effects 

(deterministic, stochastic somatic, stochastic hereditary). 

  The  method(s)  used  for  the  calculation  of  the  economic 

consequences. 

  The selection and justification of parameter values. 

The sources of specific items of data needed to perform probabilistic 
consequence analysis (meteorological, population, agricultural 
production, land, food distribution data, etc) are auditable and valid. 

The approach used for meteorological sampling is appropriate. 

The data used is up-to-date.  

The site-specific data used to perform the consequence calculations 
is auditable.  

Assumptions made are justified. 

The input information used in the Level 3 PSA calculations regarding 
countermeasures and protective actions is stated. 

The countermeasure strategies modelled are either reasonable 
bounding assumed strategies (in which case the countermeasures 
are feasible and consistent with national requirements) or are based 
on the NPP’s existing emergency plan. 

Where default data provided by the code is used, its applicability is 
justified explicitly. 

The usage of default data is documented in an auditable fashion. 

The method by which the full spectrum of severe accident source 
terms generated in the Level 2 PSA are linked to a limited number of 
actual consequences in the Level 3 PSA is documented and 
auditable. 

The calculations performed are auditable. 

The computational process used to integrate the entire PSA model 
(Level 1 through Level 3) is appropriate. 

Sensitivity analyses have been performed and are documented. The 
sensitivity analyses capture key assumptions and combinations of 
assumptions. 

Uncertainties associated with the input parameters have been 
quantified using an acceptable method. 

Based on the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations, an 
understanding has been gained of which parametric and modelling 
uncertainties contribute most to the overall uncertainty in the results 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 73 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

of the Level 3 PSA. This analysis is documented. 

The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations demonstrate 
that the overall conclusions obtained from the L3 PSA are still valid. 

The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset 
of Level 3 calculations. In these cases no significant errors have been 
found. 

The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative 
subset of Level 3 calculations. In these cases, the results obtained 
are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder.    

Table A1-4.2  Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 3 PSA Results 

The Level 3 PSA results are clearly presented in the PSA 
documentation.  

A summary of the Level 3 PSA results together with accompanying 
discussions is included. This summary is sufficient for PSA and non-
PSA specialists to get a clear understanding of the risk of various 
types of consequences, where this risk comes from and which are the 
most significant uncertainties.  A clear explanation is included of why 
the results of the Level 3 PSA are considered valid despite the 
identified uncertainties.  

All issues or vulnerabilities identified by the Level 3 PSA are 
documented explicitly. The corrective actions proposed to address the 
vulnerabilities are clear.  

An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed 
corrective actions has been carried out and is documented explicitly. 
This has been used as the basis for assigning a level of priority to 
these proposals.  

A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective 
actions are captured, as appropriate, in the emergency procedures 
and arrangements 

A demonstration that the individual and societal risks from the facility 
under evaluation are ALARP is included. 

5. 

Table A1-5   Overall Conclusions from the PSA 

The PSA is documented thoroughly. The PSA documentation enables 
the event and fault tree model, assumptions and quantification results 
to be traceable to the design documentation, drawings, analyses, 
operating procedures, and any other supporting information. 

All aspects of the PSA have been subject to sufficient level of 
independent review by the dutyholder to provide confidence in its 
technical adequacy. These reviews are documented. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 74 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

The PSA has a credible and defensible basis.  

The PSA reflects the design of the NPP at the freeze date. 

The PSA reflects the operation of the NPP up to the freeze date. 

A process is in place to ensure that the assumptions regarding design 
and operation of the facility reflected in the PSA are captured in the 
development of future procedures, policies and strategies, design, 
design modifications and back-fits, etc.  

The PSA is fully accepted by the NPP operator. 

A process is in place to keep the PSA living, i.e. to be updated as 
necessary (at least every three years) to reflect the current design 
and operational features / practices and to incorporate feedback from 
internal and external operational experience, improved understanding 
of physical processes or accident progression and advances in 
modelling techniques.  

The PSA has enabled a judgement to be made as to the acceptability 
of the overall risk of the facility against the SAPs numerical targets, 
and in particular targets 7 (individual risk) and 9 (societal risk). 

The PSA has demonstrated that a balanced design has been 
achieved, such that no particular class of accident or feature of the 
facility makes a disproportionate contribution to the overall risk. 

The PSA has been used effectively to demonstrate that the risk 
associated with the design and operation of the NPP is ALARP 

6. 

Table A1-6.  Use of PSA to Support Decision-Making 

Note: This table is only generic. Detailed guidance on how to review 
specific PSA applications will be added as appendices to this TAG. 
Alternatively, stand-alone TAGs will be released for each application. 

Table A1-6.1  Expected uses of PSA 

The PSA has been used to support the NPP design process.  There 
is evidence that this has been done iteratively, i.e. that the PSA has 
been used to inform all the stages of the design. 

The PSA has been used to support design modifications and back-
fits, including the analyses of options considered during the 
preparatory stages of modifications projects.  

The PSA has been used to provide an input to the development of, 
and changes to, operating rules / technical specifications and testing, 
inspection and maintenance schedules of the NPP. 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 75 of 81 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The PSA has been used to provide an input to the optimal planning of 
testing, inspection and maintenance activities and to the daily 
management of plant configuration (i.e. when releasing plant for 
testing, inspection or maintenance). 

The PSA has provided an input to the justification for any change to 
the way in which the facility is operated. 

The PSA has been used to produce performance measures to 
demonstrate that the NPP is operated in such a way as to ensure that 
the numerical risk is kept ALARP. 

The PSA is used to understand the risk significance of any abnormal 
occurrences at the NPP and to identify measures to avoid future re-
occurrences of safety significant events. 

The PSA has been used to support and inform Periodic Safety 
Reviews of the Facility. 

The PSA has been used to support development of, and changes to, 
operating procedures for managing all stages of incidents and 
accidents (including severe accidents). 

The PSA has been used to provide an input to the design of, and 
changes to, operator-training programmes for management of 
incidents and accidents (including severe accidents). 

The results of the PSA have been used to provide an input for off-site 
emergency planning and response including a demonstration of the 
effectiveness of countermeasures. 

The issue being evaluated using the PSA is explicitly defined. 

The type of results required as input to the decision-making are 
identified up-front.  

Any applicable numerical criteria are identified up-front. 

(In general, the inspector should expect that the impact of the issue 
on the overall risk should have been addressed by evaluating the 
Core Damage Frequency, Large Release Frequency, and Societal 
Risk). 

All aspects of the PSA model and data potentially affected by the 
issue under study are identified explicitly.  

All aspects of the PSA model and data identified as being potentially 
affected by the issue under study have been analysed for impact and 
modified if necessary. The analysis is transparent. The modifications 
are adequate. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table A1-6.2  Quality of the safety submissions supported by PSA 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 76 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

All the assumptions in the PSA have been checked for validity against 
the issue under study and modified if appropriate. The analysis is 
documented explicitly. 

Sensitivity analyses have been carried out to evaluate the sensitivity 
of the risk to changes in relevant assumptions and areas of modelling 
uncertainty. The analyses are documented explicitly. 

Sensitivity analyses have been carried out to check the risk impact of 
different options under consideration. The analyses are documented 
explicitly. 

Sensitivity analyses have been performed to address ‘what if’ 
scenarios. The analyses are documented explicitly. 

The results of the sensitivity analyses have been used to inform the 
final decision. The way in which the final decision has been informed 
by the results of the sensitivity analyses is transparent. 

Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been 
estimated and propagated through the models to generate uncertainty 
distributions on the resulting risk figures. 

The means resulting from the uncertainty propagation have been 
compared against the numerical criteria relevant to the application 
(rather than using the point estimate means which result from a 
simple arithmetic evaluation of the PSA cutsets). 

Based on the results of the sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, it has 
been shown that the most important modelling and parametric 
uncertainties have been minimised, or that the results of the 
application are not affected by these uncertainties, or that the 
decision based on the results of the application takes account of the 
uncertainties by application of the precautionary principle (as 
described in R2P2). Details of this are documented explicitly. 

If the issue under study affects aspects of the risk not covered within 
the scope of the existing PSA. These limitations in the PSA in relation 
to the issue under evaluation have been recognised and identified 
explicitly.  

In such cases, the PSA models have been adequately extended and / 
or enhanced to cover the missing aspects. The new models and data 
are adequate. 

If extending the PSA is considered not to be practicable (e.g., due to 
time constraints), the risk impact of the issue associated with areas 
outside the scope of the existing PSA has been analysed 
qualitatively. The analysis of this is transparent and adequate.  

The outcome of the PSA studies performed to evaluate issues is 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 77 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

 

ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION 

MET? 

clear, comprehensive and traceable.  

The outcome of the PSA studies performed to evaluate issues 
includes the following: 

  A description of the issue under study. 

  A  description  of  the  PSA  evaluations  undertaken  including  any 

numerical criteria established. 

  A description of the new (or modified) assumptions. 

  A description of the modifications to models and data and relevant 

drawings.   

issue. 

  The  identification  of  key  areas  of  uncertainty  in  relation  to  the 

  Relevant numerical results. 

  Lists of cutsets and importance measures. 

  Risk  profile  (identification  of  dominant  initiating  events,  accident 

sequences, and protection failures). 

  Results  of 

the  sensitivity  and  uncertainty  analyses  and 

conclusions obtained from these. 

  Qualitative risk arguments used. 

  A  clear 

interpretation  of  all 

information  above  and 
unambiguous 
systematic 
application of decision-making criteria applied to the results of the 
PSA evaluations.  

recommendations  based  on  a 

the 

 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 78 of 81 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

10. 

 

 

APPENDIX 2 – NS-TAST-GD-030 – MAPPING BETWEEN ISSUE O 
(PROBABILISTIC SAFETY ANALYSIS) OF THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 
AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TAG 

TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 

TAG 

COMMENTS 

WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 
(ISSUE O) 

1. Scope and content of PSA  

level  2, 

operational 

1.1 For each plant design, a specific 
PSA  shall  be  developed  for  level  1 
considering  all 
and 
relevant58 
states, 
covering  fuel  in  the  core  and  in  the 
spent  fuel  storage  and  all  relevant 
internal  and  external 
initiating 
events.  External  hazards  shall  be 
included  in  the  PSA  for  level  1  and 
level  2  as  far  as  practicable,  taking 
into  account  the  current  state  of 
If  not 
science  and 
practicable,  other 
justified  meth-
odologies shall be used to evaluate 
the  contribution  of  external  hazards 
to the overall risk profile of the plant.  

technology. 

1.2  PSA  shall 
dependencies.  

include 

relevant 

4.6  (Sections  2 
and 3)  

 

describes 

4.5 
SAP FA.12 

Note:  a  Level  3 
PSA  is  required 
to address some 
of  the numerical 
targets  of 
the 
SAPs 

 

are 

Specific,  detailed  requirements  to 
address scope and level in PSAs for 
NPPs 
throughout 
spread 
Appendix 1, e.g. Tables A1-1.2, A1-
2.1,  A1-2.7.1,  A1-2.8  and  A1-5 
(paragraph  starting  The  PSA  has 
enabled…) 

 

 

starting 

Specific  requirements  to  address 
dependencies in PSAs for NPPs are 
spread  throughout  Appendix  1,  e.g. 
Table  A1-2.3.2  (paragraph  starting 
“All  dependencies…”,  Table  A1-
“The 
2.4.1  paragraph 
general  approach  for  the  inclusion 
on 
(hardware/software)  common 
cause  failure  events…”.  Table  A1-
“The 
2.4.2  paragraph 
information  on  dependencies…” 
and  paragraph  starting  “all  intra-
system  and  inter  system  common 
cause failures…)   

starting 

Specific  requirements  to  perform 
sensitivity  and  uncertainty  analyses 
for  NPPs  are  spread 
in  PSAs 
throughout  Appendix  1,  e.g.  Table 
A1-2.9.1,  and  Table  A1-3.6.  See 
also  Tables  A1-3.i  for  expectations 
sensitivity  and  uncertainty 
on 
analyses in the Level 2 PSA  

1.3  The  Level  1  PSA  shall  contain 
sensitivity and uncertainty analyses. 
The  Level  2  PSA  shall  contain 
sensitivity 
as 
analyses 
appropriate, uncertainty analyses.  

and, 

4.6  Section  4, 
4.7 

1.4  PSA  shall  be  based  on  a 
plant 
realistic  modelling 

of 

4.6 Section 2 

Specific requirements to ensure that 
in  PSAs  for  NPPs  the  models  and 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 79 of 81 

 
 

TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 

TAG 

COMMENTS 

data  are 
realistic  are  spread 
throughout  Appendix  1,  e.g.  Table 
A1-2.2  and  A1-2.6.  Table    A1-2.3.2 
includes  specific  expectations  for 
mission  times  (as  does  SAP  para 
652) 

Specific 
the 
requirements 
Human  Reliability  Analysis  in  PSAs 
for  NPPs  are  included  in  Table  A1-
2.5 

for 

4.6 Section 3 

3.6,  4.11,  4.12, 
4.15 

LC  17 
licensee QA system 

requires  an  appropriate 

2.5, 4.11  

The  TAG  taken  as  a  whole  will 
ensure  that  the  PSA  is  performed 
according  to  an  up  to  date  proven 
methodology.  A  large  amount  of 
International 
is 
embodied in the TAG (see A1-4 and 
A1-5) 

experience 

4.7. Section 1 

Specific  expectations  are  included 
in  Table  A1-2.9.3,  A1-3.6,  and  A1-
6.1. 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 
(ISSUE O) 

response,  using  data  relevant  for 
the  design,  and  taking  into  account 
human  action 
the  extent 
assumed  in  operating  and  accident 
procedures.  The  mission  times  in 
the PSA shall be justified. 

to 

1.5  Human  reliability  analysis  shall 
be  performed,  taking  into  account 
the  factors  which  can  influence  the 
performance  of  the  operators  in  all 
plant states 

 

 

2. Quality of PSA  

2.1  PSA  shall  be  performed, 
and  maintained 
documented, 
quality 
according 
the 
management 
licensee.  

the 
system 

to 

of 

2.2  PSA  shall  be  performed 
according  to  an  up  to  date  proven 
methodology,  taking  into  account 
international  experience  currently 
available.  

3. Use of PSA  

3.1  PSA  shall  be  used  to  support 
safety  management.  The  role  of 
PSA in the decision making process 
shall be defined.  

4.7 

3.2 PSA shall be used to identify the 
need  for  modifications  to  the  plant 
and  its  procedures,  including  for 
accident  management 
severe 
measures,  in  order  to  reduce  the 
risk from the plant.  

risk 

from 

the  plant, 

3.3 PSA shall be used to assess the 
overall 
to 
demonstrate that a balanced design 
has  been  achieved,  and  to  provide 
confidence  that  there  are  no  "cliff-
edge effects".  

4.3  Section  2 
see  also  SAP 
FA.25 and paras 
676  and  677  for 
“cliff 
edge 
effects” 

3.4 PSA shall be used to assess the 
adequacy  of  plant  modifications, 

4.7. Section 1 

 
 

 

 

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 80 of 81 

TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 

TAG 

COMMENTS 

3.6  The  results  of  PSA  shall  be 
used  to  ensure  that  the  items  are 
included  in  the  verification  and  test 
programmes 
they  contribute 
significantly to risk. 

if 

 

4.7. Section 1 

4. Demands and conditions on the use of PSA  

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS 
(ISSUE O) 

changes  to  operational  limits  and 
conditions  and  procedures  and  to 
assess 
of 
the 
operational occurrences.  

significance 

input 

3.5 Insights from PSA shall be used 
as 
to  development  and 
validation  of  the  safety  significant 
training 
the 
programmes 
licensee, including simulator training 
of control room operators.  

of 

4.1  The  limitations  of  PSA  shall  be 
understood,  recognized  and  taken 
into  account  in  all  its  use.  The 
adequacy  of  a  particular  PSA 
application shall always be checked 
with respect to these limitations.  

or 

changing 

is  used, 

for 
4.2  When  PSA 
the 
evaluating 
testing 
requirements  on  periodic 
and  allowed  outage 
for  a 
time 
system or a component, all relevant 
items,  including  states  of  systems 
and 
safety 
functions  they  participate  in,  shall 
be included in the analysis.  

components 

and 

4.3  The  operability  of  components 
that have been found by PSA to be 
important to safety shall be ensured 
and  their  role  shall  be  recorded  in 
the SAR.   

 

 

 

4.7. Section 1 

4.7. Section 2 

4.7. Section 2 

 

 

 

 

4.7. Section 1  

 

Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 
CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 

Page 81 of 81 

 
 

