Procurement cns-tast-gd-4.1.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

PROCUREMENT AND INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/104195) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 

7.  PRINCIPLES AND EXPECTATIONS .................................................................................. 4 

8.  ESTABLISH AN EFFECTIVE COMMERCIAL AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY TO 

ENABLE DELIVERY OF SUCCESSFUL REQUIREMENTS ............................................... 5 

9.  EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SECURITY SPECIFICATION ............................ 6 

10. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – DEVIATIONS FROM SPECIFIED 

REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................................ 8 

11. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – COUNTERFEIT FRAUDULENT AND  SUSPECT 
ITEMS (CFSI) ...................................................................................................................... 9 

12. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SUPPLY CHAIN OPERATIONAL   

EXPERIENCE (OPEX) ...................................................................................................... 11 

13. MAINTAINING AN INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY .......................................... 12 

14. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 14 

15. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 15 

 

 
1. 

 
 
 
 
 

© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 
 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 1). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 2). 

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance (CS&IA) documentation that helps them demonstrate 
ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The 
SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their 
assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  
This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s supply 
chain management arrangements.  It aims to provide general advice and guidance to 
ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out 
how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the detail, 
targets or methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have 
addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe 
this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate.  

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. 

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an 
important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation. 

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 3) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 4). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 2 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that ‘a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied’. The importance of issues 
relating to assurance activities are also recognised in the Nuclear Security 
Fundamentals, specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12  

h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues 
and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear 
security including cyber security at all times. 

A more detailed description of the elements is provided in Recommendations level 
guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 5). 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.1 – 
Procurement and Intelligent Customer Capability, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear 
Supply Chain Management.  The TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated 
guidance and policy documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 6) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises.  

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 7) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

6.1 

This TAG informs regulatory assessment of Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
arrangements and procurement activities for nuclear security related items or services. 
It establishes ONR’s expectations of the purchaser, as the organisation at the top of 
the Supply Chain. It considers the procurement of items or services in support of 
construction, manufacture, repair, replacement, modification of plant and equipment. 

6.2 

The level of ONR scrutiny is dependent on the security significance of the items or 
services being procured. This scrutiny might include confirmation of the adequacy of 
the supplier’s quality management arrangements and/or be part of the manufacturing 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 3 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

or construction inspection activities identified via the supplier’s quality planning 
arrangements. 

Regulatory Expectations 

6.3 

The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders will describe in the security plan how 
they achieve effective procurement for items or services for nuclear security and 
maintain an intelligent customer capability to support nuclear supply chain 
management arrangements. 

FSyP 4 - Nuclear Supply 
Chain Management 

Procurement and Intelligent 
Customer Capability 

SyDP 4.1 

Dutyholders should maintain an ‘Intelligent Customer’ capability for all work carried 
out on their behalf by suppliers that may impact upon nuclear security. 

 
In delivering this principle, dutyholders should: 

6.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

maintain the capability to recognise work of nuclear security significance to 
ensure  it is subject to the appropriate procurement procedures 

utilise an effective procurement cycle for work with nuclear security 
significance 

establish an effective commercial strategy to enable the delivery of security 
plan requirements 

maintain an intelligent customer capability, which is applied to all work 
carried out on its behalf by suppliers that may impact upon nuclear security  

develop appropriate specifications, with appropriate stakeholder input, to 
support the procurement of items or services (including those relating to 
cyber security or information assurance) of nuclear security significance 

ensure appropriate arrangements are in place for all contracts involving 
security classified information or equipment including that considered SNI in 
accordance with FSyP 7 and its associated delivery principles  

PRINCIPLES AND EXPECTATIONS 

ONR’s expectations for the principles to be applied to the procurement of goods and 
services with nuclear security significance is summarised in Diagram 1 below. 

 
7. 

7.1 

 

Diagram 1 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 4 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

7.2 

8. 

8.1 

8.2 

The dutyholder should also ensure that suppliers protect all tender documentation, 
specifications and operational requirements in accordance with their security 
classification.   

ESTABLISH AN EFFECTIVE COMMERCIAL AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY TO 
ENABLE DELIVERY OF SUCCESSFUL REQUIREMENTS 

The purchaser’s commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy will influence all 
arrangements associated with the procurement of nuclear security related items or 
services. An effective strategy, deployed through the organisation’s business planning 
process should enable delivery of security plan requirements  

The purchaser should plan to ensure their commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy 
addresses current and future security plan requirements over the lifetime of the facility 
including the decommissioning phase. The arrangements should be subject to routine 
review as they could be impacted by multiple influences, for example:  

 

 

 

 

parent body organisation ownership; aggregation of contracts across 
multiple dutyholders or organisations under parent group ownership, 
performance issues 

changes in the Supply Chain; mergers, acquisitions, insolvency, capability 
and performance issues 

security of supply; business continuity issues, strategic/critical suppliers, 
globalisation of Supply Chains 

make/buy policy; outsourcing and in-house capability or supply  

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 5 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

 

drive to improve efficiency and competitiveness while enhancing quality and 
security performance 

8.3 

The purchaser’s commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy, policy and arrangements 
should be appropriately resourced and include measures to mitigate the risks of 
Supply Chain issues adversely impacting on the security plan. The arrangements 
should be subject to routine review as part of the organisation’s business planning 
processes to ensure they remain effective and are proportionate to mitigating the 
identified risks.  

Inspectors should consider: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Has the purchaser developed a commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy to 
address current and future security plan requirements? 

Does the purchaser have effective arrangements to manage their Supply 
Chain including a clear strategy and/or policy, and is organised to deliver 
with roles and responsibilities clearly defined?  

Does the purchaser have the organisational capabilities to manage supply 
chain delivery? 

Are the purchaser’s SCM arrangements subject to routine review to ensure 
they remain effective in addressing security plan requirements? 

Has the Supply Chain strategy been developed cognisant of the learning 
available from within the organisation, Supply Chain, nuclear and wider 
industry? 

Does the strategy encourage collaborative working with the Supply Chain, 
sharing common security aims, objectives and success criteria? 

Do the purchaser’s make/buy (i.e. outsourcing and in-house provision) 
arrangements effectively consider current and future security plan 
requirements as part of the decision making criteria? 

9. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SECURITY SPECIFICATION 

9.1 

9.2 

The purchaser should issue security specifications which adequately describe the 
items or services, meet the security plan/operational requirements and identify the 
associated level of quality assurance. 

Establishing an effective security specification is of key importance in the procurement 
cycle. An ineffective specification will mean that any contractor in the Supply Chain will 
find it difficult to deliver the purchaser’s requirements right first time, regardless of their 
own capabilities and processes.  The dutyholder should also have in place a process 
to ensure that the supplier is reliable and can provide the equipment or service in an 
acceptable timeframe.  

9.3 

Given the importance of the security specification, it is essential that those writing them 
are Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) to perform the task and their work is 
subject to the appropriate levels of verification, validation and approval commensurate 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 6 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

9.4 

9.5 

9.8 

9.9 

with the security significance of the item or service being procured. At the pre-contract 
stage, the purchaser should ensure that prospective suppliers fully understand that the 
items or services being procured are a principal means of ensuring and maintaining 
nuclear security.  

The specification should detail any applicable design codes and standards that fully 
describe the items or services to be procured together with other generic contractual 
requirements. This combination of requirements should identify appropriate levels of 
quality assurance requirements to be applied. These should include, where applicable, 
assessment, audit, quality planning, quality control, inspection, surveillance, testing, 
and release or handover of items and should fully detail the records package required 
to be supplied with the item or service.  

For items or services which are the principal means of ensuring nuclear security, 
additional assurance and inspection arrangements may be required, which go beyond 
basic compliance with established design codes and standards. ONR may wish to 
assess the technical specification used as the basis for procurement prior to the 
procurement action, taking into account any additional requirements.  

9.6 

Throughout the design process, appropriate assurance activities should be undertaken 
to ensure that the design meets the requirements of the purchaser and applicable 
codes or standards in addition to any regulatory expectations.  

9.7  Where technical specifications are prepared for nuclear security significant items or 

services by contractors on behalf of the purchaser, these should be reviewed by staff 
from the purchaser’s organisation who are competent to confirm that the specifications 
properly reflect the design intent, meet any design codes and standards and as such 
meet security plan requirements. This review should be carried out before contract 
placement.  

On receipt of the purchase order, the supplier should carry out a review of the contract 
documentation to ensure it can fulfil all the technical, procedural and commercial 
requirements of the contract. For complex and high capital value security equipment, 
discussions between the supplier (and sub-suppliers) and purchaser should normally 
have covered these aspects prior to contract placement. The supplier should advise 
the purchaser of any changes to its (or its sub-suppliers) ability to fulfil the contract as 
such changes arise.  

The purchaser should operate a change control process to ensure that any changes to 
specification, design or contract are properly controlled and authorised, and the 
implications for nuclear security and the manufacturing/delivery processes, including 
changes to documentation (particularly process quality related, e.g. quality plans), are 
fully considered prior to the implementation of the change. Where these changes 
impact on the security plan, it may require further assessment by ONR. 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

 

Do specifications reflect the design intent, design codes and standards, and 
meet security plan requirements?  

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 7 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Are specifications prepared by contractors reviewed by competent staff from 
the purchaser’s organisation?  

Are appropriate levels of quality assurance applied to the procurement of 
items or services significant to nuclear security?  

Do the purchaser’s specification and assurance arrangements address any 
specific regulatory requirements?  

Do suppliers fully understand that the items or services being procured are a 
means of ensuring and maintaining nuclear security, and their significance? 

Are variations to specification, design or contract properly conceived, 
communicated, implemented and assessed for nuclear security implications 
and authorised by SQEP staff? 

Do suppliers notify the purchaser of any proposed changes and that they are 
properly assessed and authorised by the purchaser? 

Are supplier documents (e.g. quality plans and manufacturing instructions) 
re-approved before a change is implemented?  

10. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – DEVIATIONS FROM SPECIFIED 
REQUIREMENTS 

10.1  The purchaser should ensure that suppliers identify and categorise any deviations from  

specified requirements, referring to the dutyholder’s Design Authority (DA – as defined 
in Security TAG 1.2) for assessment.  Where any deviations are made the purchaser 
should ensure that these do not affect the proposed security outcome. 

10.2  Non-conformances are unplanned deviations from the purchaser’s requirements and 
can be identified in a number of ways including inspection, audit or surveillance. They 
can occur at any level within the Supply Chain. Deviations can be associated with an 
item or service or be the result of the inadequate implementation of the approved 
process.  

10.3  The identification, reporting and resolution of deviations should not be seen as 

negative, but as an indication that the achievement of the purchaser’s requirements is 
of prime importance. The control of any deviation from the technical specification is 
fundamental to the achievement of quality and therefore the integrity of the item.  

10.4  All organisations within the Supply Chain should, as part of their quality management 
arrangements, operate consistent arrangements, overseen by the purchaser, for the 
categorisation and disposition of deviations.  

10.5  Purchasers at each level of the Supply Chain should ensure their suppliers have 
adequate arrangements for the identification, categorisation and management of 
deviations for items or services. These should include obtaining the approval of the 
purchaser, or dutyholder’s DA, for the deviation in the form of a concession or 
procedure for re-work. They should inform the ultimate purchaser and potentially ONR 
(via the purchaser at the head of the Supply Chain) for deviations that are significant to 
nuclear security.  

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 8 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

10.6  Technical Queries (TQs) are slightly different to a non-conformance. For the former, 

the supplier is asking a question for approval prior to doing the work and for the latter, 
the work has started and is found to be either outside the acceptance criteria for the 
product, or the process has not been implemented as approved. TQs are raised during 
the work planning stage and help inform or clarify the contract requirements. Once the 
purchaser agrees to a TQ that requires a change in the design or other process, then 
the purchaser should track the modification to completion with contract changes 
through formal change control being communicated to the supplier if applicable. The 
purchaser’s arrangements should ensure that both types of deviation from the 
originally specified requirements are appropriately controlled and documented.  

10.7  There should be an audit trail in work control documents for all approved deviations as 

well as systematic overarching deviation tracking logs that show the status of each 
deviation. Approved deviations should be used to update drawings to reflect ‘as built’ 
status to aid configuration control for future modifications.  

Inspectors should consider: 

 

 

 

Are deviations identified, characterised and formally sanctioned by 
competent persons with the appropriate delegated authority? 

Do suppliers bring all deviations of nuclear security significance to the 
attention of the purchaser, dutyholder’s DA and ONR if appropriate, via the 
purchaser at the head of the Supply Chain? 

Is there a demonstrable audit trail for all approved deviations from the work 
control document to logs showing the status of each deviation raised, 
approved, rejected or reworked with links to required document changes? 

11. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – COUNTERFEIT FRAUDULENT AND 
SUSPECT ITEMS (CFSI) 

11.1  The purchaser should have arrangements to mitigate the risks of Counterfeit, 

Fraudulent and Suspect Items (CFSI) entering their Supply Chain.  

11.2  There should be recognition throughout all levels of the Supply Chain that there are 

parties who might wish to substitute CFSI for genuine items or services for commercial 
gain or with malicious intent. All purchasers should be aware of the risks and hazards 
of CFSI entering the nuclear industry Supply Chain and understand their role in 
mitigating this risk.  

11.3  The purchaser or supplier should deploy appropriate mitigating measures to prevent 
CFSI impacting on their Supply Chain depending on the scale, complexity, any 
international involvement in and/or nuclear security application of their items or 
services.  

11.4  The following non-exhaustive list presents appropriate mitigation that should be 

deployed as part of a purchaser/supplier’s management system, to defend against 
CFSIs for high risk items or services:  

 

robust SCM and procurement process arrangements including effective 
Supply Chain oversight and assurance, including inspection and testing  

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 9 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

competent staff involved in the acquisition processes from specification of 
requirement through to inspection and receipt of items and services and 
review of associated records 

material or component traceability back to source supplier, including 
verification testing by third party specialist organisations for high risk items  

use of positive material identification and destructive testing methods during 
product inspection, testing and receipt and as part of assurance sampling of 
high risk proprietary items  

product samples of known precision and authenticity available for 
comparison with purchased items   

training and awareness within purchasing organisation SCM teams (i.e. 
Engineering, Procurement, Audit & Inspection), partners and suppliers. Staff 
should be aware of the risks of CFSI and be trained in mitigation and 
detection methods as appropriate  

processes and procedures to identify, investigate, record incidences of CFSI 
and share lessons learnt  

benchmarking with other purchasers  

liaison with Trading Standards and security agencies 

requirements clearly defined in contract terms and conditions  

the effective management of non-conforming items to prevent their re-entry 
into the Supply Chain as genuine items  

11.5  The purchaser should have arrangements in place to quarantine a suspect item or 

service. Further investigation will be required by the purchaser or supplier to confirm 
the item as conforming, non-conforming, counterfeit or fraudulent.  

11.6  Examples of counterfeit or fraudulent items or services should be shared within the 
purchaser and/or the dutyholder organisation, Supply Chain and wider industry as 
appropriate to support learning, prevent use and encourage remedial measures in 
other impacted facilities, but only when the purchaser has conducted sufficient 
investigation to confirm if the item is CFSI or not.  ONR should be informed of all 
examples of counterfeit or fraudulent items or services confirmed within the 
purchaser’s Supply Chain that impact on high risk items or services or relate to 
shortfalls in the purchaser’s SCM or procurement arrangements. 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

 

Does the purchaser have effective processes in place to prevent against 
CFSI entering their Supply Chain at any level? 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 10 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Is the purchaser employing positive material identification and effective 
testing methods during its assurance arrangements, including sample testing 
of proprietary high risk items?  

Are staff that are involved in the purchaser’s acquisition processes 
competent to perform their role, aware of the risks of CFSI and understand 
and comply with the organisation’s mitigation methods?  

Does the purchaser have appropriate arrangements in place to quarantine, 
investigate and disposition suspect items as conforming, non-conforming, 
counterfeit or fraudulent?  

Has the purchaser established arrangements to raise awareness of CFSI 
within their Supply Chain and is encouraging the open reporting of CFSI 
examples to maximise learning and mitigate risks?  

Can the purchaser provide examples of where they have identified CFSI and 
taken appropriate remedial measures including notification to the ONR and 
the sharing of learning through their Operational Experience (OPEX) 
arrangements?  

12. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SUPPLY CHAIN OPERATIONAL 
EXPERIENCE (OPEX) 

12.1  The purchaser should have arrangements to capture and act on OPEX feedback from 
its Supply Chain and SCM activities, sharing learning as appropriate within the 
organisation, its Supply Chain and wider industry.  

12.2  The purchaser should have effective OPEX processes that capture and act upon cross 

discipline (e.g. engineering, commercial, quality, inspection and test, safety & security 
etc.) SCM issues associated with the sub-standard procurement of high-risk items or 
services from specification of requirements, sourcing of suppliers, oversight of delivery, 
inspection, test and installation or use.  

12.3  The purchaser should ensure relevant learning is captured and acted upon from their 

Supply Chain, related to the provision of high risk items and services. This could 
include incidences of CFSI in their Supply Chain tiers, sub-standard Supply Chain 
performance issues that could impact the purchaser at the top of the Supply Chain and 
factors that might influence future commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy. 

12.4  The purchaser should recognise that key suppliers (such as those providing niche 
products or construction contractors) in the nuclear industry could provide items or 
services to multiple dutyholders and as such, sub-standard performance from a key 
industry supplier could have an impact on the nuclear security related activities of 
multiple dutyholders. 

12.5  The purchaser’s OPEX processes should enable the wider sharing of relevant Supply 
Chain and SCM experience with other dutyholders and wider industry as appropriate. 
Arrangements should be in place to evaluate OPEX shared by other dutyholders, and 
wider related industry, for implications within the purchaser’s organisation and 
management system arrangements. 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 11 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

12.6  ONR should be informed of confirmed instances of sub-standard Supply Chain 

performance in the provision of high-risk items or services, particularly where the 
supplier is likely to form part of the Supply Chains of other dutyholders or future 
dutyholders.  

Inspectors should consider 

 

 

 

 

 

Is the purchaser’s OPEX process established, capturing and acting upon 
sub-standard performance issues associated with their SCM arrangements?  

Is the purchaser’s OPEX process capturing and acting upon issues 
occurring within their different Supply Chain tiers?  

Are OPEX arrangements generating improvements in the purchaser’s SCM 
arrangements and influencing commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy?  

Does the purchaser evaluate relevant learning from other dutyholders, 
purchasers and supplier organisations, nationally and internationally as 
appropriate?  

Does the purchaser share learning with its Supply Chain and wider industry 
as appropriate?  

13.  MAINTAINING AN INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY 

13.1  The concept of intelligent customer (IC) for safety is defined by the IAEA as follows: 

‘As an intelligent customer, in the context of nuclear safety, the management of 
the facility should know what is required, should fully understand the need for a 
contractor's services, should specify requirements, should supervise the work 
and should technically review the output before, during and after implementation. 
The concept of intelligent customer relates to the attributes of an organisation 
rather than the capabilities of individual post holders’. 

  

This equally applies to nuclear security and a dutyholder’s intelligent customer 
capability for security will be a subset of its core capability. 

13.2  The primary responsibility for the security of a nuclear premises rests with the 

dutyholder. The dutyholder should be able to demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the 
plant design and security plan for all plant and operations on the site. The dutyholder 
must be in control of activities on its site, understand the hazards associated with its 
activities and how to control them, and have sufficient competent resource within its 
organisation to act as an ‘Intelligent Customer’ for any work it commissions externally.  

13.3 

In the context of effective SCM the dutyholder should maintain an ‘Intelligent 
Customer’ capability to know what is needed, to fully understand the need for a 
contractor’s services, at any level of the Supply Chain, specify requirements, supervise 
work and technically review the output before, during and after implementation.  

13.4  ONR’s regulatory expectations of a dutyholder’s arrangements for the use of 

contractors, for retaining control of nuclear security and for discharging its other duties 
are summarised as follows. The dutyholder should:  

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 12 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

have sufficient  SQEP in-house staff to ensure effective control and 
management for nuclear security 

retain overall responsibility for, and control and oversight of, nuclear security 
and security of all of its business, including work carried out on its behalf by 
contractors 

ensure choices between sourcing work in-house or from contractors is 
informed by a company policy that takes into account the nuclear security 
implications of the selection 

maintain an Intelligent Customer capability for all work carried out on its 
behalf by contractors that may impact upon nuclear security;  

ensure that it only lets contracts for work with nuclear security significance to 
contractors with suitable competence, security standards, management 
systems, culture and resources  

ensure that all contractor staff are familiar with the nuclear security 
implications of their work and interact in a well-coordinated manner with its 
own staff 

ensure that contractors’ work is carried out to the necessary level of security 
and quality in practice 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

Does the dutyholder retain and maintain the core capability to understand, 
specify, oversee and accept nuclear security related work undertaken on its 
behalf by contractors at any level of the Supply Chain?  

 

 

 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 13 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

14. 

REFERENCES 

Security Assessment Principles  

1.  
 
2. 
 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5.  

 
6. 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. 

 
7. 
 
 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management 
System. 
 

 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 14 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  
 
 

15. 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

Counterfeit, Fraudulent and Suspect Items 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

Cyber Security and Information Assurance 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Intelligent Customer 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation 

Operational Experience 

Operational Requirement 

Supply Chain 

Supply Chain Management 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Security Assessment Principles 

Security Delivery Principle

Technical Assessment Guide 

Technical Query 

CFSI 

CPPNM 

CS&IA 

FSyP 

IAEA 

IC 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

OPEX 

OR 

SC 

SCM 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SyAPs 

SyDP 

TAG 

TQ 

 
 
 
 

 
 
OFFICIAL  
 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 15 of 15 

