Reliability and resilience of the security system cns-tast-gd-5.1.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

RELIABILITY AND RESILIENCE OF THE SECURITY SYSTEM 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19075. (2017/100306) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

 
1. 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO LEGISLATION .................................................................................... 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 4 

7.  ELEMENTS OF SYSTEM RESILIENCE ............................................................................. 4 

8.  SUITABLY QUALIFIED AND EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL ............................................. 7 

9.  ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND THE SECURITY SYSTEM .................................................. 7 

10. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 9 

11. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 
 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 10 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 7). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 1).  

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance documentation that helps them demonstrate ongoing legal 
compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The SyAPs are 
supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their assessment and 
inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  This Technical 
Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s 
arrangements to ensure their security systems have appropriate levels of reliability and 
resilience. It aims to provide general advice and guidance to ONR inspectors on how 
this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out how ONR regulates the 
dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the methodologies for dutyholders to 
follow in demonstrating they have addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s 
responsibility to determine and describe this detail and for ONR to assess whether the 
arrangements are adequate.  

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI.  

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers reliability, resilience and sustainability to 
be important components of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation.   

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 4) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 3). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 2 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied. The importance of issues 
relating to quality assurance is also recognised in the Nuclear Security Fundamentals, 
specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12 A 
nuclear security regime ensures that each competent authority and 
authorised person and other organisations with nuclear security 
responsibilities contribute to the sustainability of the regime by: 

o 

o 

o 

Allocating sufficient human, financial and technical resources to carry 
out the organisation’s nuclear security responsibilities on a continuing 
basis using a risk-informed approach 

Routinely conducting maintenance, training and evaluation to ensure 
the effectiveness of the nuclear security systems 

Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address 
issues and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate 
nuclear security, including cyber security, at all times  

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

A more detailed description of the quality assurance is provided in Recommendations 
level guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 2). This document states “The quality assurance policy and 
programme(s) for physical protection should ensure that a physical protection system 
is designed, implemented, operated and maintained in a condition capable of 
effectively responding to the threat assessment or design basis threat and that it meets 
the State’s regulations, including its prescriptive and/or performance based 
requirements.” 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 5.1 – Reliability 
and Resilience, in support of FSyP 5 – Reliability, Resilience and Sustainability.  The 
TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy 
documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 5) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises. 

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 6) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Page 3 of 10 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

 

 

6.1 

6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

It is particularly important to ensure, so far as possible, that the security system is 
capable of performing its function with an adequate level of reliability. This objective 
may be achieved by the adoption of a number of different provisions, together with the 
use of techniques to demonstrate the adequacy of the specified measures. The 
reliability of plant and systems to provide the security effect should be demonstrated by 
the dutyholder to be consistent with the risks associated with the loss of this capability. 
This should be informed by the Category of the security function and the Classification 
of the security structure, system or component (SSC) concerned.  

The security system design should incorporate an appropriate level of redundancy to 
reduce the effects of random failure, and diversity and segregation to reduce the 
effects of common cause failure and malicious actions. This should take account of the 
site or facility the system is protecting and its vulnerability to threats described in the 
Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions document (Reference 
8). 

In assessing the fitness for purpose of the security system, and particularly the ability 
to deliver a particular effect, a number of issues relating to redundancy and diverse 
provisions should be considered. Security plans should clearly identify the security 
function of all SSCs so that this assessment can be carried out. 

Regulatory Expectation 

There is a regulatory expectation that dutyholders demonstrate in the security plan 
how they ensure that the design and operation of the security system delivers 
appropriate levels of redundancy, diversity and segregation. Dutyholders should 
provide sufficient resources (including personnel) to inform the design, to maintain and 
to restore nuclear security SSCs, thus building resilience to enable an appropriate and 
effective incident response, and a recovery programme that reflects the risk of any loss 
of service. Essential services critical to the correct functioning of the security system 
should be given the same priority as the system itself and as such are required to have 
appropriate levels of reliability and resilience. 

FSYP 4 - Reliability, 
Resilience and 
Sustainability 

Reliability and Resilience 

SyDP 5.1 

Security structures, systems and components should be appropriately qualified, with 
design incorporating reliability and resilience through ‘failsecure’, redundancy, 
diversity and segregation. There should also be sufficient resources available and 
contingency arrangements developed to ensure continuity of security provision.  

7. 

ELEMENTS OF SYSTEM RESILIENCE 

Redundancy 

7.1 

Redundancy is frequently defined as the provision of more than the minimum number 
of equipment items required to perform a specific security function. Such redundancy 
allows a specified security function to be delivered when one or more items (but not all) 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 4 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

7.2 

7.3 

OFFICIAL 
 
 
are unavailable, due to a variety of unspecified potential failure mechanisms or 
maintenance (e.g. identified faults or hazards).  

Experience dictates there are deterministic and probabilistic arguments to justify the 
provision of redundancy in SSCs. A design which is considered acceptable will display 
adequate levels of system redundancy to ensure it is fit for purpose and should 
perform the required security function. These characteristics will include final 
provisions to satisfy the deterministic and probabilistic requirements of any potential 
design for SSCs important to security.  

Dependent Failure 

A possible threat to security system resilience is that posed by dependent failure. 
These have the potential to prevent the performance of a required security function 
through simultaneous loss of redundant provisions. Particular illustrations of this type 
of failure are common-cause failures (CCF).The inspector should be satisfied that the 
risk from dependent failures has been reduced to a level which is acceptable within the 
limits set by design requirements. It is important to note that reliability does not 
necessarily increase indefinitely in proportion to levels of redundancy, and this is 
primarily due to common origin or common cause effects. This type of failure is often 
referred to either as CCF or a common mode failure (CMF). A CCF is a dependent 
failure event where approximately simultaneous multiple failures result from a single 
shared cause (e.g. fire). A CMF is a common cause event where the multiple 
equipment items fail in the same mode.  

7.4  Multiple failures can occur due to common weaknesses or dependencies shared by 
components. Such failures can cause failure of all redundant components in a single 
security system or failure of components in more than one system. Dependent failures 
can considerably reduce the reliability of the security systems relative to that expected 
of random failures acting isolation.  

7.5 

The main types of dependencies which could cause potential loss of a security function 
are described below. 

 

 

 

 

Functional  dependencies,  which  arise  from  shared  or  common  functional 
features;  such  as  a  common  electrical  power  source,  common  wiring  or  a 
shared communication node.  

Spatial  dependencies,  which  arise  from  physical  features  shared  by 
components  located  in  a  common  location;  such  as  common  radiation  or 
chemical  conditions,  a  common  environment  and  common  support 
structures,  and  vulnerability to  leaks  of  dangerous  fluids  (high temperature, 
corrosive or toxic).  

Inherent dependencies, which arise from shared characteristics; such as a 
common  principle  of  operation  or  technical  feature  such  as  electrical 
overload.  

Human  error  related  dependencies,  which  arise  from  human  errors 
affecting some shared or common human process; such as human error in 
design  or  manufacture,  or  operating  staff  error  during  operation  and 
maintenance. 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 5 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

7.6 

To provide protection against dependent failures, the inspector should seek 
confirmation that the dutyholder has identified and, where necessary and practicable, 
implemented measures in design, construction and operation to eliminate them or 
reduce their potential effect. Examples of such measures are:  

 

 

 

 

the provision of segregation to eliminate spatial dependencies; 

the avoidance of functional dependencies by segregation of SSCs important 
to security and their support services; 

the provision of alternative and independent equipment to eliminate undue 
reliance on any single system. The purpose of this element of the approach 
is to provide protection against any 'hidden failure dependencies' that may 
not be identified; and 

approaches and procedures should be implemented to minimise the 
possibility of failure dependencies arising during design, manufacture, 
construction and operation, including dependencies due to operator and 
other human error. 

Diversity 

7.7  Where a component of the security system is at potential risk from common cause 
failures, one means of reducing the susceptibility is to employ diverse provisions in 
separate redundant trains or systems. For example, the detect function over a given 
area could be delivered by both fixed-line and pan-tilt-zoom closed circuit television 
powered by segregated electricity supplies and a dual perimeter intruder detection 
system utilising complementary technologies (for example infrared and microphonic 
technologies). A dutyholder should consider appropriate measures to include diversity 
within the components of the system which is designed to deliver an individual effect 
and/or across the security systems in its entirety. Engineering diversity is defined as 
the provision of dissimilar means of achieving the same objective; e.g. the use of 
features which differ in the physical means of achieving a specific objective or use of 
different equipment made by different manufacturers.  

7.8 

7.9 

7.10 

Diversity provides one means of protection against some dependent failure 
mechanisms, by removing common features which may lead to failure dependencies. 
Diversity particularly provides protection against inherent dependencies and human 
error related dependencies.  

The possibility of the physical co-location or the functional support of diverse systems 
leading to dependencies which defeat the objective of providing diversity, should be 
addressed in the layout and functional design of the security system where 
appropriate. 

Segregation 

In a resilient security system and despite diverse provisions, the threat of common 
cause failures from hazards such as fire or hostile intent may be reduced by system 
segregation. This is the separation of components by distance or physical barriers, a 
particular example being provision of principal fire barriers to delineate individual fire 
zones; they may also serve as barriers to other hazards such as blast. Appropriate 
levels of segregation should be present in a dutyholder’s provisions in order to 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 6 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

maximise the likelihood that a security function will be performed, despite the 
occurrence of faults and hazards, possibly in combination.   

7.11  Equipment segregation is the separation of redundant and/or diverse components by 
distance or by barriers in order to prevent all (or sufficient to enable system failure) of 
the components being damaged, particularly in the event of common hazards or 
malicious action. Segregation is provided in the design to ensure internal hazards, 
such as fire and certain external threats do not damage separate chains of security 
equipment to the extent that its functional reliability is unacceptably reduced. The most 
straightforward manner in which segregation can be achieved is through distance and 
avoidance of co-locating components. 

System Independence 

7.12  Security systems may be subject to spurious operation in addition to operational 
failures. These can arise because a given security system component does not 
possess a sufficient level of independence from other separate systems. Measures 
need to be employed by the dutyholder to ensure that, wherever possible, security 
system components are not adversely affected by the spurious operation or failure of 
other systems, especially through any potential for hidden dependency (for example, 
by having a single system responsible for fire and security response). This is best 
achieved by designing in both functional and physical isolation. 

8. 

SUITABLY QUALIFIED AND EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL 

8.1 

The dutyholder’s security organisation should possess adequate Suitably Qualified and 
Experienced (SQEP) personnel to support security systems. This includes having 
sufficient personnel with the necessary competences and knowledge to provide 
resilience and maintain the capability to manage, operate, maintain and repair security 
systems at all times.  

9. 

ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND THE SECURITY SYSTEM 

Where essential services (such as computer based security systems) are necessary to 
support the functioning of a Physical Protection System (PPS), then these services 
should be sufficiently resilient and secure to ensure that their loss or interruption does 
not adversely affect the ability of the PPS to achieve the required outcome as defined 
in SyAPs Annexes C and D. 

 Inspectors should consider: 

  Has reliability, resilience and sustainability been considered throughout the 
design stage for any new facility or security system and incorporated within 
relevant operational requirements? 

  Are requirements for security systems regularly reassessed in conjunction with 

all stakeholders? 

  Are there sufficient SQEP and other resources to manage, operate, maintain 

and repair the security system? 

  Does the design and operation of the security system display appropriate levels 

of redundancy, diversity and segregation? 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 7 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

  Do essential services (such as power) necessary for the correct functioning of 
the security system have the appropriate levels of security, reliability and 
resilience? 

  Have potential dependencies and/or vulnerabilities of the security system been 

identified and mitigated? 

  Do security systems ‘fail secure’ and if they do not, are security requirements 

appropriately balanced against safety requirements and are adequate 
compensatory security measures available? 

  Does the dutyholder demonstrate the ability to learn from experience of 

maintaining the security system? 

 

Is there a process of continuous improvement in place in relation to the security 
system’s reliability, resilience and sustainability? 

  Are appropriate quality performance and assurance mechanisms applied to 

security systems? 

 

Is the response to the failure or loss of part of or all of a SSC regularly 
exercised or rehearsed? 

 

 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 8 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

10. 

REFERENCES 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

1. 
 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf. 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. 

Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036   

Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions.   

 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business 
Management System. 
 

 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 9 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

11. 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

OFFICIAL 
 
 

Business Continuity 

Common Cause Failure 

Common Mode Failure 

BC 

CCF 

CMF 

CPNI 

CPPNM 

FSyP 

IAEA 

NIMCA 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

PPS 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SSC 

SyAP 

SyDP 

TAG 

 

Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation

Physical Protection System 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Structure, System and Component 

Security Assessment Principle 

Security Delivery Principle 

Technical Assessment Guide 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 

Page 10 of 10 

 
OFFICIAL 
 

