 cns-tast-gd-4.4.pdf
 Title of document OFFICIAL ONR GUIDE COMMISSIONING OF SECURITY SYSTEMS AND INFRASTRUCTURE Document Type: Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 Date Issued: March 2017 Review Date: March 2020 Approved by: David Pascoe Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/104173) Revision commentary: New document issued TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 2 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 7. THE COMMISSIONING PROCESS .................................................................................... 4 8. COMMISSIONING AND PERSONNEL ............................................................................... 5 9. COMMISSIONING AND MAINTENANCE ........................................................................... 5 10. COMMISSIONING AND TRAINING .................................................................................... 6 11. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 7 12. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................. 8 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 03/17 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 1 Page 1 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION OFFICIAL 1.1 1.2 2.1 3.1 3.2 4.1 4.2 The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 7). This document contains Fundamental Security Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 1). The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security and Information Assurance documentation that helps them demonstrate ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s arrangements to ensure their security systems are subject to appropriate commissioning. It aims to provide general advice and guidance to ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements. It does not prescribe the methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance with relevant legislation. 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 4) and the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 3). Further guidance is available within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that a quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all activities important to physical protection are satisfied. The importance of issues relating Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 2 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL to quality assurance is also recognised in the Nuclear Security Fundamentals, specifically:  Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12 A nuclear security regime ensures that each competent authority and authorised person and other organisations with nuclear security responsibilities contribute to the sustainability of the regime by: a) Developing, implementing, and maintaining appropriate and effective integrated management systems including quality management systems; and, h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear security, including cyber security, at all times. A more detailed description of the quality assurance is provided in Recommendations level guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5) (Reference 2). This document states “The quality assurance policy and programmes for physical protection should ensure that a physical protection system is designed, implemented, operated and maintained in a condition capable of effectively responding to the threat assessment or design basis threat and that it meets the State’s regulations, including its prescriptive and/or performance based requirements.” 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements. This TAG provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.4 – Commissioning, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear Supply Chain Management. The TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 5) describes the Cabinet Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on and off nuclear premises. 5.3 The Classification Policy (Reference 6) indicates those categories of SNI, which require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS Commissioning is the activity of setting to work systems and associated infrastructure, including assuring all systems and components are designed, installed, tested, operated, and maintained according to the Operational Requirements (ORs) of the owner. A commissioning process may be applied to new projects and existing systems, subject to modifications or significant maintenance. The scale of the commissioning activity should be proportionate to the level of complexity and degree of impact that the project will have on the site or facility’s ability to meet its security outcome as defined in Annexes C and D of SyAPs. Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 3 of 8 OFFICIAL 4.3 5.1 5.2 6.1 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.2 OFFICIAL This TAG is aimed at providing guidance to the inspector when assessing the adequacy of the commissioning arrangements demonstrated through the performance of the equipment (and those personnel who will manage, operate and maintain it) and the adequacy of the procedures to support the operation of that equipment. As part of this process, early engagement with dutyholders is essential in order to fully understand their proposals, assess the quality and completeness of the activities and measure the compliance of the plant and systems with the Physical Protection System (PPS) outcome and postures. This engagement should have been on-going throughout the development of the project. The commissioning activity is the first opportunity to confirm the performance of the installation and its contribution to meeting relevant security objectives. 6.3 This TAG should also be used to consider circumstances when security equipment is being removed at a dutyholder’s site, when the site is being progressively being decommissioned. Regulatory Expectation 6.4 The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders demonstrate in the security plan how they implement proportionate commissioning plans which should include clear definition of roles and responsibilities, performance indicators, availability of resources and clearly defined decision points (to be met prior to moving to the next phase), as appropriate. Where the plant and systems form a part of an existing infrastructure, the inspector should expect to identify that a risk assessment has been undertaken to review the potential impact on security caused by the commissioning of the new (or refurbished) equipment. Planned mitigation of any associated risks should also be evidenced. FSYP 4 - Reliability, Resilience and Sustainability Commissioning SyDP 4.4 Before bringing into operation or returning to service any facility, system or process that may affect security it should be subject to testing and a commissioning plan defined in the security plan. 7. 7.1 7.2 THE COMMISSIONING PROCESS Commissioning activity should be much more than simply setting plant and equipment to work. The effectiveness of security equipment to meet PPS postures and outcomes described in SyAPs, requires the integration of a wider range of assets to support the operation of security equipment. This may include uninterruptable and possibly alternative power supplies such as diesel generators, to secure reliable performance. Commissioning should provide evidence and demonstrate that all aspects of the wider infrastructure operate as planned in both normal and fault conditions to confirm operational resilience. Commissioning is typically broken into two parts usually termed ‘cold’ and ‘hot’ commissioning. The former usually demonstrates the completeness of the plant and systems. It confirms that all components are installed, connections made and plant labelled. Evidence should be available to show this process has been undertaken and appropriate ‘snagging’, to put things right, has been expedited. 7.3 ‘Hot’ commissioning refers to a phase when the plant and systems are energised. It is when the actual performance of the individual plant components is demonstrated Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 4 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 7.4 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.8 8.1 9.1 against their specified performance. This is followed by component integration into systems together with the human response elements. The final combination of the different systems into the overall infrastructure should prove the overall effectiveness of the installation and whether it meets the intent and success criteria described in the ORs. Integral to this ‘hot’ commissioning phase is the record of commissioning activities. The inspector should expect comprehensive records to be kept of this phase of the programme. This captures the settings for plant components to deliver the system performance and may need to correlate with the ‘as tested’ settings in the case of Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure approved security equipment for example. These base settings are important in confirming equipment remains fit for purpose and to enable straightforward fault finding and system re-commissioning later in its life. A package of information should be delivered which also includes a set of ‘as built’ drawings, operating and maintenance procedures and requirements, a recommended spares holding and other pertinent information. Commissioning plant represents the penultimate step towards operation. The inspector should seek evidence from the dutyholder that the original ORs are met throughout the different phases of commissioning. Evidence of any changes (and associated justifications to support them), should be available from the dutyholder. The introduction of new or revised security equipment and systems, impacts the approved security plan in that it represents a change to the approved arrangements. It would be expected that these changes are captured in any Security Improvement Schedule (SIS), itself a part of the approved security plan. The inspector should ensure that the dutyholder is preparing the appropriate submission to modify the security plan (and the SIS) in order to reflect the changes to the arrangements delivered by the new plant and systems The introduction of new plant and systems should be subject to extant local facility modification procedures to ensure the impact of this new equipment on both existing safety and security systems is understood and approved. The inspector should seek evidence of this being done prior to ‘hot commissioning’ being undertaken. 8. COMMISSIONING AND PERSONNEL Plant and equipment are material parts of the security infrastructure. However, personnel and associated processes are similarly important. Accordingly, the identification of Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) human resource to manage and operate this new equipment is necessary to deliver the capability. It is essential, therefore, to seek evidence that all these aspects are being addressed in the commissioning programme. 9. COMMISSIONING AND MAINTENANCE Security infrastructure should provide an effective and reliable system to deliver the required PPS posture and outcome. Accordingly, the long-term reliability of systems must be underpinned by an appropriate maintenance regime and spares holdings. This is supported by the provision of operating and maintenance manuals to describe those activities required to support system performance and the schedule for component replacement. Often the manufacturer will provide a recommended spares holding to support system reliability. Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 5 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 9.2 The dutyholder should be able to demonstrate a maintenance strategy has been developed and is in place. It may include provision of in-house resources or contracted services to support the strategy. The inspector should seek confirmation that the dutyholder has the appropriate funding identified to support the long term operation and maintenance of the equipment or plant being commissioned. 10. COMMISSIONING AND TRAINING 10.1 Where appropriate, the training of staff linked to delivery of security outputs associated with the plant, equipment and systems being commissioned, should also be demonstrated. The ‘cold’ commissioning phase offers a good opportunity to review the adequacy of the training of operational personnel, the availability of operating procedures and the proposed integration of the plant and systems into the existing security infrastructure. This can be considered as a ‘readiness review’. The inspector should expect a positive decision point within the dutyholder’s plan to allow a move to the next phase of commissioning and written justification of such a decision. Inspectors should consider:  Does the new equipment enable the dutyholder to achieve the required PPS outcome? process? schedule? plans?  Is the commissioning process underpinned by appropriate levels of internal and external stakeholder engagement and adequate ORs?  Are all appropriate stakeholders involved during the actual commissioning  Are there appropriate plans and procedures in place to support the commissioning process and the introduction of any new or amended processes or procedures?  Is the commissioning process supported by adequate numbers of SQEP personnel? (managers, operators and maintainers)  Have whole life maintenance and training requirements been adequately considered during the commissioning process?  Are there contingency plans if security equipment is not commissioned on  Has security equipment being commissioned been incorporated within security  Does the commissioned equipment meet defined performance requirements and if it does not what is the response of the dutyholder?  Is commissioned equipment appropriately reliable and resilient? Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 6 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 11. REFERENCES OFFICIAL Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003. Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13. Nuclear Security Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5). January 2011. www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf. IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20. Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s Nuclear Security Regime. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/S ecurity_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036 Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management System. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 7 of 8 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 12. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS OFFICIAL CPPNM Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material FSyP IAEA NISR NSS ONR OR PPS SIS SNI SPF SQEP SyAP SyDP TAG Fundamental Security Principle International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Industries Security Regulations Nuclear Security Series Office for Nuclear Regulation Operational Requirement Physical Protection System Security Improvement Schedule Sensitive Nuclear Information Security Policy Framework Suitably Qualified and Experienced Security Assessment Principle Security Delivery Principle Technical Assessment Guide Doc Ref: CNS-TAST-GD-4.4 Revision 0 TRIM Ref: 2017/104173 Page 8 of 8 OFFICIAL ns-tast-gd-076.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE Construction Assurance Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-076 Revision 4 Date Issued: September 2015 Review Date: February 2020 Approved by: T Allmark Superintending Inspector Record Reference: TRIM Folder 1.1.3.978. (2019/113164) Review date extended to February 2020. A replacement TAG will be produced in due course. Revision commentary: © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 08/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 1 Contents 1.0 Purpose and scope 2.0 Relationship to licence and other relevant legislation 3.0 Relationship to SAP’s, IAEA safety standards, etc 4.0 General advice to inspectors 5.0 Development and Design Phase 6.0 Construction Phase Appendix 1 - Areas of Construction and Expectations References 1.0 Purpose and scope This TAG contains general guidance and advice to ONR Inspectors on 1.1 aspects of civil engineering construction assurance. 1.2 Civil engineering construction assurance encompasses the processes/ procedures and cultural aspects necessary to provide the level of confidence that the works are constructed in accordance with the design intent and as required by the safety case and that the materials used and construction methodologies adopted have not undermined the design assumptions made. This document is not intended to provide detailed guidance on either the 1.3 design or construction process, but is produced to highlight certain salient areas for consideration as part of the regulatory process and may be relevant to planned interventions throughout the construction process. 1 It should be read in conjunction with other relevant TAG’s including but not 1.4 limited to ‘The management for safety ‘ T/AST/0391; Design safety assurance, T/AST/0572 ; Structural integrity, Civil Engineering aspects, T/AST/0173 ; Procurement of nuclear safety related items or services , T/AST/0774 . This guide is neither prescriptive nor all encompassing. The intention is to 1.5 highlight typical construction assurance items that a licensee would be expected to address during the design and construction phases of a construction project. Appendix 1, identifies some typical aspects, which an ONR inspector may wish to consider, or seek further specialist opinion on. It is to be expected that further assurance may be sought throughout the 1.6 commissioning, handover and operational phases of a facility. However, this TAG only considers construction assurance up to ‘practical completion’ by the civil engineering contractor of its works. 1.7 General reference has been made within this guide to issues relating to both quality and design assurance during the design and construction phases, however further information is contained in the following guides for these subject areas:-  T/INS/17, quality assurance;  T/INS/19, construction or installation of new plant;  T/AST/57, design safety assurance. 1.8 The principles described within the above guides are considered ‘relevant good practice’ to ensure that within the life cycle of a construction project, what is constructed is indeed the physical form of the design intent, and further that both have been executed to a suitable standard, thus ensuring the quality of the product is right for the categorisation and classification of the structure and/or component being considered. 1.9 It is important for the assumptions made by the designer, incorporated within the justification of the design within a safety case, to be properly carried through the construction phase. The final construction of the works is thus as much a part of the safety case as the design. 2.0 Relationship to licence and other relevant legislation Licence conditions 14; 17; 19; 20; 22 are the principal relevant licence 2.1 conditions requiring the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements. Licence condition 14, relating to safety documentation, requires that the 2.2 licensee “shall make and implement adequate arrangements for the production and assessment of safety cases consisting of documentation to justify safety during the design, construction, manufacture, commissioning, operation and decommissioning phases of the installation.” 2.3 Licence condition 17, relating to management systems, requires the licensee to “make and implement adequate quality management arrangements in respect of all matters which may affect safety”. 2 2.4 Licence condition 19, relating to construction or installation of new plant, requires that “Where the licensee proposes to construct or install any new plant which may affect safety the licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to control the construction or installation.” Licence condition 20, relating to modification to design of plant under 2.5 construction, requires that “The licensee shall ensure that no modification to the design which may affect safety is made to any plant during the period of construction except in accordance with adequate arrangements made and implemented by the licensee for that purpose.” Licence condition 22, relating to modification or experiment on existing plant, 2.6 requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to control any modification or experiment carried out on any part of the existing plant or processes which may affect safety.” 2.7 By the very nature of the subject and potential effect on safety there are many other possible relevant licence conditions including LC 26 - control and supervision of operations; LC 25 operational records; LC 12 duly authorised and other suitably qualified and experienced persons. The general duties under the health and safety at work act7, sections S2(1) ; 2.8 S3(1); S4(1); S4(2) and S6(1)a , impose statutory duties. The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 20078, places duties 2.9 on designers to have “adequate regard to the need:– “(i) to avoid foreseeable risks to the health and safety of any person at work carrying out construction work or cleaning work in or on the structure at any time, or of any person who may be affected by the work of such a person at work take due recognition of health and safety in the design and implementation process.” 2.10 Section 8(2)a of the Ionising Radiation Regulations9 also make specific reference to engineering controls and design features, to achieve the restriction of exposure to ionising radiation. 3.0 Relationship to SAP’s, IAEA safety standards, etc 3.1 Reference should be made to the HSE’s safety assessment principles (SAPs)11 for nuclear facilities together with other relevant technical assessment guides (TAGs) when assessing such design and construction arrangements, processes and procedures. The most relevant safety assessment principles for construction related activities are the civil engineering principles ECE.16 –ECE.19. 3.2 ECE.16: Civil construction materials should be compliant with the design methodologies used, and shown to be suitable for the purpose of enabling the design to be constructed, operated, inspected and maintained throughout the life of the facility. 3.3 ECE.17: The construction should use appropriate materials, proven techniques and approved procedures to minimise the occurrence of defects that might affect the required integrity of structures. 3 3.4 ECE.18: Provision should be made for inspection during construction to demonstrate that the required standard of workmanship has been achieved, 3.5 ECE.19: Where construction non conformities are judged to have a detrimental effect on integrity or significant defects are detected, remedial measures should achieve the original design intent. 3.6 Other relevant SAP’s are, Leadership and management for safety, MS 1-4;Safety classification and standards: ECS 1-3 and Decommissioning: DC 1, 6 The 2006 SAPs were also benchmarked against the extant IAEA Safety 3.7 Standards and their main principles are encompassed within the SAPs11. The IAEA Safety Standards GS-R-3 and GS-G-3.1 provide advice on quality 3.8 management and assurance aspects applicable to construction activities. 3.9 Other relevant guidance can be found in NS-R-1, safety for NPP design; NS- R-3 Site evaluation for nuclear installations , section 6 on quality control; NS-G-3.6 Geotechnical aspects of site evaluation and foundation for NPP. 3.10 WENRA reactor safety reference levels18 relating to:- A) Safety policy, S1 Issuing and Communication of a Safety policy (S1.1, 1.5); B) Operating Organisation, S1 Organisational Structure (S1.2,1.3), S2 Management of Safety and Quality (S2.6) , S3 Sufficiency and Competency of Staff (S3.6); C) Management System, S5 Process Implementation (S5.5, 5.6, 5.7,5.8), S6 Measurement, Assessment and Improvement (S6.4,6.5); D) Training and Authorisation of NPP staff, S2 Competence and Qualification (S2.1), S3 Training Programmes and Facilities (S3.6), S4 Authorisation (S4.3); G) Safety classification of structures, systems and components S1 objective (S1.1) , S2 Classification Process (S2.2) , S3 Ensuring Reliability (S3.1), S4 Selection of materials and qualification of equipment (S4.2); H) Operational Limits and Conditions S1 Purpose (S1.1), are all relevant. 4.0 General advice to inspectors This section provides general advice on ONR expectations and potential 4.1 areas to target during inspection/assessment. More specific advice on some features associated with construction assurance is then given, firstly during the development and design phases of the project (Section 5.1) and then during the construction phase (Section 5.2). 4.2 During both the design and the construction phase’s of a project, quality assurance and design assurance are inextricably linked to the issues surrounding construction assurance. A number of existing technical assessment guides are relevant to these specific subject areas and the Inspector should consider the latest available information. 4 4.3 The following guides are useful initial reference points:- T/INS/017 – Quality Assurance T/AST/017 – Structural integrity, civil engineering aspects3 T/AST/039 – Management for safety1 T/AST/057 – Design safety assurance2 4.4 Whilst it is recognised that design organisations may not be the licence holder, both the design and construction process should be under the control of the appropriate licensee acting as an “intelligent customer”. SAP’s11 (paragraph 56). 4.5 ONR expects that for construction of a nuclear facility the standards employed are commensurate with the magnitude and nature of the hazard presented by the facility, and are higher than for general industrial design and construction works. Suitable safety categorisation and classification by the licensee should set the requirements for the extent of control and assurance that the design and construction of a facility is subject to. 4.6 Prior to the submission of the Pre Construction Safety Report (PCSR) by the licensee, ONR assessment is more likely to focus on standards and principles being employed, the visibility of optioneering to demonstrate ALARP, and the adequacy of the design process and associated arrangements. 4.7 ONR inspectors need to satisfy themselves that the licensee understands the importance of construction assurance, that appropriate processes have been put in place and that aspects which will provide construction assurance are being given appropriate consideration during the development and design phases of the project. The inspector should seek assurance that between: the safety case claims; 4.8 the civil design substantiation; the specification of the design details and the construction competency of the contractors that the licensee chooses to employ, there is a consistency of purpose. In addition confidence needs to be gained that the licensee’s construction 4.9 assurance processes are targeted at achieving an acceptable outcome, so far as can be established during the development and design phases of the project. In particular confidence needs to be gained that the civil engineering designer’s intentions will be specified in a manner that can be realised by competent SQEP contractors. 4.10 Following submission of the PCSR but prior to permissioning, the licensee’s processes should be fully documented. In addition, activities subject to a permission by ONR should be fully defined. ONR focus at this stage will be towards the technical details, but the licensees systems and procedures must be seen to be capable of delivering the requirements of the design and safety case. 4.11 Following permissioning and commencement of construction ONR focus is more likely to be on management and technical control in order to ensure that the completed installation conforms to the specified requirements. Firstly, to confirm the suitability and sufficiency of all that has been documented as the input to an assured construction process. Secondly, to ascertain those organisations responsible for 5 construction activities fully understand the documented construction information. Thirdly, to confirm by observation that construction is proceeding in a controlled and validated manner, and lastly to gain confidence that the civil engineering structures are being constructed as specified without undermining of any of the design assumptions. 4.12 On-site inspections of construction activities should focus on areas of highest nuclear safety significance where high standards are required and/or on any novel techniques being employed. 4.13 Appendix 1 outlines some specific aspects of civil engineering where inspectors may wish to focus their attention during the construction phase of a project. This is included as an aide memoire for Inspectors but the list is not considered in any way to be definitive or exhaustive. 5.0 Development and Design Phase 5.1 Quality during the design phase 5.1.1‘ Quality assurance and quality control are aspects of good management’5, in this respect, areas relating to design and subsequent construction need to be appropriately managed to achieve the required quality of the product. 5.1.2 Areas for consideration during the design phase may include, but not be limited to: -  Organisations and the communications between them  Staffing and training , including SQEP evaluation  Document control, including preparation, review , approval and change control  Design control, including interfaces, verification, validation and changes  Procurement control, including supplier evaluation and selection, control of items and services purchased Reference should be made to T/INS /017 on Quality Assurance. 5.2 Design categorisation and classification 5.2.1 Structures, systems and components (SSC) should be designed and specified to provide the required engineering functionality. This functionality will have an influence on safety and so requires an appropriate safety category to be assigned. 5.2.2 ONR expectation is that the processes and procedures considered should be to an appropriate level dependent upon the categorisation and classification being applied. 5.2.3 Categorisation and classification will affect:-      the design methods used and their extent; the standards to be used; the material selections made; the procurement processes used; the methods of fabrication and installation; 6  the extent and type of inspections as well as maintenance requirements and in- service inspections proposed. 5.3 Codes and standards 5.3.1 Whilst BS and Euro EN codes, (including nationally determined annexes) may not be specifically written with nuclear facility designs in mind, it is noted that they may form the base understanding of the contractor in terms of control of materials, workmanship, durability, tolerances, testing and inspection regimes. 5.3.2 It is customary in the UK nuclear industry for designers to utilise other international or USA codes as part of the design process. These may also be supplemented or replaced entirely by the licensees own standards. Differences in dimensional or other units may emanate from foreign designs and this aspect may well require further consideration. 5.3.3 It is therefore important to recognise that codes may set standards and requirements for construction details, workmanship, concrete mix design, reinforcement and fixing details, material specifications and in the case of the EN codes, options for control of construction which may be unfamiliar to a UK construction work force. 5.3.4 Care needs to be exercised at the detailed design stage that appropriate account is taken of these aspects ensuring that the design intent is carried through as anticipated during the construction process. Appendix 1 provides some examples where the design intent may not be met unless the requirements are clearly communicated by the designer to the contractor. 5.3.5 The contract drawings, schedules and construction specification should include all design, workmanship, inspection and testing requirements to be fulfilled during the construction process. However, it would also be expected that the designer highlights areas to the contractor that might not represent ‘normal’ practice in order to establish the practicality of the proposal and ensure the contractor understands the full requirements. 5.3.6 In addition the licensee should have sufficient capability to understand such issues and their bearing on safety and fulfil the role of an intelligent customer. Refer to T/AST/04921. 5.4 Material use 5.4.1 International codes tend to base design on the materials available within the country of origin. These materials may not be the standard / readily accepted / readily available norms in the UK, for example reinforcing bar yield strengths. 5.4.2 Useful information may be obtained from the relevant industry bodies such as CARES22 for rebar, BCSA31 for steel construction, IMS32 for masonry. 5.4.3 The designer needs to specify materials (for instance reinforcement bars) that will meet the relevant structural requirements in a manner that is acceptable to the contractor. Failure to communicate and agree with the contractor these requirements will lead to formal design change requests later. Changes in materials 7 subsequent to the completion of the design should be kept to a minimum as determining the implications for the design can require multi disciplinary specialist knowledge and if there are numerous design changes there is a risk that the specialists may not be aware of all the changes when making a decision. 5.5 Codes and testing requirements 5.5.1 International / USA codes13,23,24,25 such as American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC 360) Specification for structural steel buildings23 or American Concrete Institute (ACI 349)13 Code requirements for nuclear safety related concrete structures, may base the design on differing forms of test results and requirements . For example the use of cylinder compressive strengths instead of cube compressive strengths (see also Appendix 1). 5.5.2 ONR expectation is that the principal contractor / contractor should be fully conversant with the relevant codes used and further that suitably qualified and experienced personnel (SQEP) are employed in the relevant site supervisory roles. An Inspection and Test Plan (ITP) should be agreed with the licensee. 5.6 Alignment of the civil engineering design and safety case 5.6.1 The PCSR should document how operational and safety functional requirements have been derived and communicated to the civil engineering designer in a clear manner. 5.6.2 The designer’s requirements are generally communicated to the contractor through the contract drawings, schedules and construction specification. It is expected that these documents would include all design, workmanship, inspection and testing requirements to be fulfilled during the construction process. 5.6.3 It is an ONR expectation that the designer and contractor engage in early dialogue regarding the methods to be used, the design intent and possible contractor ‘optioneering’. This is considered an important stage in the early communication of both the design and the assumptions made during the design to fulfil the safety case justification. 6.0 Construction Phase 6.1 Quality during the construction phase 6.1.1 The general information on quality assurance and quality control presented in section 5.1.1 during the design is also applicable during the construction phase. Areas for consideration during the construction phase may include, but not be limited to: -  Site control, including identification and control of materials, parts and components, handling storage and shipping  Process control; including planning, procedures, permits, hold points, method statements Inspection, monitoring and testing   Non conformance control  Corrective actions, including close out and verification 8  Records, including as designed and as constructed, maintenance and operational manuals 6.2 Forms of contract 6.2.1 It is an ONR expectation that criteria should have been set by the licensee for selection of the most appropriate form of contract33. The selection criteria should take into account the potential impact of administering and applying the contract on the quality of the outputs from the contract where such outputs affect nuclear safety. 6.2.2 Some factors affecting the quality of outputs may include:  Commercial pressures (for example in fixed price lump sum contracts, particularly in the delivery of complex safety related designs or components) Impact of the prescription of an overly-challenging contract programme   Suitability of the contract in relation to the maturity of the data that is to be used as input to the contract. 6.3 Supply chain management 6.3.1 Control and monitoring of contractors may be made more difficult by increases in the length of a supply chain. Even with ‘back to back ‘contracts the original design philosophy and assumptions can be lost or misunderstood through distance from the original intent. 6.3.2 A further complication may exist in the control / verification of SQEP personnel and the overall quality by the licensee of the manufacture and supply of safety related components or designs. For example, when significant design is included in ‘design and build’ forms of contract the design element of the contract may be further subcontracted thus becoming increasingly more remote within a supply chain. 6.3.3 It is an ONR expectation that a similar standard of quality assurance as applied by the licensee is evident and verifiable throughout the supply chain for nuclear safety related items. It is also expected that supply chain lengths are minimised as much as practicable. 6.3.4 Safety culture and safety awareness is as important as verifiable documentary form filling. Contractors would also be expected to exhibit a safety culture and safety awareness with a ‘questioning attitude’ similar to that of the licensee. 6.4 Design assumptions – verification 6.4.1 During the design certain assumptions may be made. For example, assumptions based on ground investigation data obtained. However, site conditions in actuality may vary. Examples such as:  Varying ground water levels  Settlement  Anomalies in ground conditions from those expected from ground investigations  Unforeseen Services 9 It is important therefore that the design team are apprised of site conditions found during the construction. 6.4.2 The use of approved contractor method statements, hold point control plans, permits to dig can also be a useful means of reviewing design assumptions. 6.4.3 It is an ONR expectation that a comprehensive quality management system should be implemented that allows the full implications of site issues to be considered against the original design assumptions, ensuring the design intent is carried through the construction process. 6.4.4 Of particular importance is a process whereby it is demonstrated that the contractor’s methods and materials are capable of delivering the designer’s intentions, especially when nuclear safety is dependent on non-standard construction methods and materials. Construction assurance and the necessity to demonstrate ALARP means that there should be a culture of continuous improvement and to this end it would be expected that construction reviews would be undertaken during the construction process. 6.5 Suitably qualified and experienced people SQEP 6.5.1 The importance of utilising the ‘right’ people, with the ‘right’ level of understanding and knowledge at the ‘right’ time should not be underestimated. 6.5.2 It is an ONR expectation that suitably qualified and experienced personnel (SQEP) in accordance with licence condition LC 12 are used at every level and that pre- training prior to contract is considered where appropriate. Reference should also be made to ONR guidance T/INS/01217, DAP’s and SQEP’s. 6.5.3 It is an ONR expectation that all SQEP records should be kept up-to-date throughout the duration of a project and at all levels throughout the supply chain. 6.6 Communication 6.6.1 Good, clear, timely communication between individuals, teams and companies is important. Clear lines of communication and expectations are all part of a quality culture. Good communication is vital and it is an ONR expectation that a construction project should have systems in place that reflect this requirement. This requirement should extend to all parties involved and at all levels including communications between the contractor and the designer. Co- located project offices should be considered as a means of facilitating communication. 6.7 Design changes 6.7.1 It is recognised that changes to the design may arise from various sources and for a variety of reasons during the construction process. It is ONR‘s expectation that the licensee, together with the design and construction teams, should operate rigorous systems to capture, record, justify and implement any proposed changes, however they are initiated. 10 6.7.2 The systems and procedures used should allow a suitably qualified and experienced person (SQEP) to decide on the implications of each proposal and permit them to be fed back to the relevant members of the design team for consideration and agreement to the change, as necessary. 6.7.3 Construction on a licensed site is subject to LC 20 – modification to design of plant under construction, and appropriate safety classification arrangements are required. 6.8 Non conformances 6.8.1 During the construction process non-conformances may occur. It is important that there are appropriate procedures and processes within the project team to record non-conformances and confirm the actions taken through the design team to address any issues resulting from a non-conformance. 6.8.2 It is ONR’s expectation that the licensee, designer and contractors should have a suitable system for recording and dealing with all non- conformances. 6.8.3 A site culture should be engendered, such that contractors are positively encouraged to report openly any potential non-conformances no matter how they have arisen. Generally, a ‘questioning attitude’ should be fostered within the construction team. 6.9 Certification of materials 6.9.1 In a modern global market, materials and components may not originate in the EU but may be sourced from around the world. Whilst this brings with it certain benefits it can also bring challenges ranging from the provision of false certification covering dubious quality control in manufacture to a lack of real auditable / traceability of components through to counterfeit parts entering the supply chain. This lack of an auditable quality trail means that the specification may be compromised, threatening any claims made in the safety case. 6.9.2 It is ONR’s expectation that batch traceability of all materials should be available and for high integrity items, component traceability should also be available. The licensee should also consider verification testing by third party of certain high safety significance items. 6.10 Contractor self certification 6.10.1 “Certification by the work originator of the design and construction of structures whose failure would not have high consequences can give adequate assurance of structural safety provided there are appropriate systems in place for ensuring competence”14. 6.10.2 However, for safety critical items of plant or nuclear related construction processes whose failure would have high consequences, third party independent certification should be used to give added assurance of structural / nuclear safety. An appropriate level of checks and certification should be found within these two extremes. 11 6.10.3 Whilst quality cannot be inspected into the construction process it is an ONR expectation that the licensee’s arrangements should include additional supervision and management systems to control the construction activity of nuclear related construction and reduce risks to nuclear safety. 6.10.4 It is an ONR expectation therefore that the certification of structural nuclear safety related work should thus only be entrusted to appropriately qualified and experienced people. 6.10.5 Reference to licence condition LC 12 concerning duly authorised and other suitably qualified and experienced persons should also be made. 6.11 Third party assurance 6.11.1 ONR’s expectation is that appropriate quality systems should be applied as necessary throughout all levels of a project supply chain in accordance with licence condition LC17. Refer also to T/INS/01728. 6.11.2 Given the potential scale of some projects it is possible that construction consortiums may be envisaged. This process may lead to project teams working to a conglomerate of systems. Whilst parts may be familiar to certain members of the team, other parts are not. This interface needs to be recognised, understood, planned and managed such that an effective, efficient quality plan is produced. 6.12 Contractor selected materials 6.12.1 It is ONR’s expectation that a suitable contractor proposed material approval system should be implemented by the licensee. Material selection by the construction team within the specification should be verified by the original designer against the original design intent as translated into the specification and hence against any claims on the safety case and validated as such. Reference should also be made to the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations and associated ACoP29 in relation to designers. 6.13 Testing, monitoring and inspection 6.13.1 It is ONR’s expectation that the use of hold points for certain testing and or inspections should be considered. Requirements should be clearly stated in the specification and should incorporate standards appropriate to the categorisation and classification of the structure, system or component. The requirements should be incorporated into agreed test and inspection plans, and hold point control plans, which have been integrated within the risk management process and programme. The use of approved contractor method statements may also act as a hold point and control over works on site. Refer also to IAEA NS-G-3.630 ; Section 2, site investigation; Section 4, consideration for foundations; Section 7, monitoring of geotechnical parameters, for further details relating specifically to site investigation. 12 6.14 As-constructed records 6.14.1 “As-constructed records have in the past received various levels of attention at the end of a project. Records management and retention is often found to be an area for poor practice or sometimes records not available due to the time delays in their production”8. 6.14.2 It is ONR’s expectation that as-constructed records should provide a fully referenced account of the work actually constructed and should be produced in a timely manner as the information becomes available throughout the contract. 6.14.3 General progress photographs may be useful during the construction phase but will generally be inadequate for more detailed recording of ‘as-constructed’ items. 6.14.4 However, for the purposes of verification of construction detail, particularly areas which cannot be readily inspected, will become inaccessible, concealed or covered once complete, it is ONR’s expectation that detailed referenced photographs should be retained and used as part of the as-constructed records. As- constructed records are an important aspect of future verification and maintenance and as such suitable and adequate provision should be made for their retention. 6.15 Modular design elements 6.15.1 The use of modular design elements and precast units manufactured off site can have benefit in terms of quality, time/ programme but bring with them potential problems. There is an increasing tendency to make such elements as large as possible. Problems of long periods in storage; haulage; transport across site; craneage; and incorporation details should all be considered both in the design and within the risk management plan and be part of an agreed and considered construction philosophy and methodology. 6.15.2 It is ONR’s expectation that early dialogue between the designer and contractor should occur to discuss elements of the construction process and how this can be best achieved. 6.16 Barriers to understanding 6.16.1 Barriers to understanding may arise through foreign companies entering the UK market. This could include both design houses or design teams working abroad and foreign contractors working in the UK. 6.16.2 “With construction companies carrying fewer of their own operatives, there tends to be a heavy reliance on labour only (LO) subcontract organisations. Many of these organisations have a diverse workforce. Language barriers are common within these workforces, giving challenges in the communication of health and safety requirements during site induction and toolbox safety talks”15. 6.16.3 The use of global workforces may reduce the level of ownership and commitment, fragmenting the quality culture ethos that is necessary within the workforce. 13 6.16.4 It is ONR expectation that a robust system of checks to understanding should be incorporated into both induction and toolbox talks relating to health, safety and construction quality issues and that relevant SQEP supervisory staff are employed. 6.17 Performance indicators 6.17.1 The selection of inappropriate performance indicators either key performance indicators (KPI’s) or safety performance indicators (SPI’s) can produce a negative culture. 6.17.2 It is ONR’s expectation that careful consideration should be given to the selection and use of relevant indicators and their effect on the drivers for the project. Evidence of monitoring the effects of KPI’s / SPI’s over time should be used. 6.18 Demolition / decommissioning 6.18.1 Reference should be made to the Safety Assessment Principles (SAP’s)11, Safety principles DC 1-8 together with the relevant guidance. 6.18.2 CIRIA report T 30.001 Demolition, Dismantling and Decommissioning Rev 03 [Jan 09]19 may also be a useful guide on aspects of demolition. 6.18.3 It is ONR’s expectation that decommissioning and demolition of structures should be considered during the planning, design, construction and operational stages and in line with licence Condition LC 35 and the CDM regulations8. 14 Appendix 1 - Areas of Construction and Expectations The following table provides areas of civil engineering related to new construction works, which inspectors may wish to use as a prompt for further consideration and thought. This list is not meant to be exhaustive. Area for consideration Concrete Attribute Strength Additional Notes Specifications to set limits Additives, including cement replacement Joints (Construction / Movement) Affect load transfer. Affect Shrinkage, construction sequence (related Issues) Specification to set limits and types. Refer to Line to Take Specify appropriate detail. Specification to reflect design code requirements on workmanship Designer to specify or contractor to agree with designer Designer to specify or contractor to agree with designer Specification to set standards Concrete Surface finish Shielding (high density concrete) Placing and compaction Importance Design based on specified strength. Excessive over or under strength will affect performance May affect long term strength, change performance and affect durability containment. Affect shielding Can affect shear performance. Cracks may need to be sealed to prevent contamination ingress/transfer difficulties May be important for control of contamination/ application of decontaminable surfaces. Durability, Location of form ties Long term records for verification of construction standards. Will be relevant also for PRS as well as initial licensing Affects seismic performance. pounding Seismic Gaps Seismic gap dimensions should be set so that the gap dimension is not smaller than the specified dimension Specification 15 Certification LC 6 arrangements Area for consideration Importance Affects seismic performance of structure Additional Notes Detailed within the design . Reiterated in the Maintenance manuals Attribute The faces of the seismic gap should not have protrusions which will reduce its effectiveness . There should be no debris in the gap and horizontal gaps should be capped to prevent entry of debris in the future Where gap filling material is specified , no alternative should be allowed without agreement of the designer Complimentary shielding Cracks, joints Concrete density Service penetrations Shielding Reinforcement Placing ,tying LC 20 . Specification Reiterated in the Maintenance manuals Carefully considered design detailing and early contractor involvement in buildability issues Specification . Agreement of remedial actions with design team Specification. Workmanship supervision, testing Carefully considered design detailing Specification . Code requirements Affects designed performance of the structure Can be difficult to support / fix in shutter. Can affect reinforcement cover/ placement unless detailed correctly Cracking and joints can compromise shielding Inadequate compaction concrete materials can affect specified requirement Can compromise shielding. Complimentary shielding may also be required Reinforcement needs to be placed and tied in accordance with the requirements of the code. If the design is in accordance with the ACI codes then detailing and workmanship requirements will be in accordance with that code, or more onerous code 16 Area for consideration Attribute Couplers Reinforcement Cover Laps bends and links Earthing Storage The provision of additional reinforcing bars ( or oversized bars) Use of galvanized or epoxy coated rebar Importance Note specific requirements for couplers to meet ACI codes. Including fixing and inspection Critical to durability To meet requirements of design codes Reinforcing bars may form part of a Faraday Cage or other earthing system. These requirements may be more onerous than the normal workmanship requirement for tying a cage Storage of reinforcement should be carefully considered. Tolerances, bar type and reinforcement quality should be verified Can affect seismic performance of structure Galvanized rebar prohibited within ACI 349 Additional Notes Code specification. Refer to line to take. Code specification Code, Specification Specification and relevant Codes Quality Assurance and testing of materials on site Specification- change control. Supervision Adequate performance of epoxy coated rebar and concrete should be demonstrated. Refer to code. Refer ACI committee 201 and 222. Pavix / Silane not now recommended Specification and Codes LC 28, LC 14 17 Corrosion protection Effects of chlorides. Deicing chemicals Welding of reinforcement Site investigation / confirmation of data, ground preparation, insitu testing. Piles / rock anchor testing Codes and Standards having varying requirements Cannot inspect therefore highest standards of construction, testing and record keeping appropriate Foundations Area for consideration Fluid retaining structures Encast Items Attribute Contamination Unidentified services Water bar, joint preparation, waterproof membranes Inspectablity, repairability, Proprietary items. Halfen type channels Post drilled fixings Use of resin anchors Material compatibility Purpose designed encast anchorages Reinforcement, compaction, voids, staggered laps Importance Recognition, testing, disposal Surveys, site location and marking Long term durability Crack control Long term durability of structure. Control of contamination Dynamic response Additional Notes Specification, SAP’s Permit to dig Good detailing, LC28 LC28 Refer to line to take Dynamic response, failure mode, rebar Failure mode. Justification Selection of materials Prevention of negative reactions Material properties. Design Codes Manufacturing records, QA, SQEPs, positioning, welding Subsequent construction needs to reflect requirements of design to support safety case. Process of making good to be of appropriate standard Use of appropriate technology for modelling of service interfaces within the design stage Access, emergency escapes. Control of flooding, power and emergency supplies Code requirements on degree of clustering . Refer to line to take Consider conditions and Location . Refer to line to take Zinc reaction with alkaline materials in concrete. Galvanic reactions. Hydrogen generation and potential for hydrogen enbrittlement. Refer to line to take Involvement of designer. Specification Codes Involvement of the designer to ensure compliance with safety case requirements. 18 Temporary openings Interface with Mechanical, Electrical and C&I architectural Interface impacts on justification of the safety case Roads , Drainage and Infrastructure Safety issues, interaction with SR service load capacity of live service ducts Area for consideration Construction Cranes Attribute Stability, ground conditions, adjacent plant Correct/ Full Design Brief Transfer of information Importance Issues associated with working adjacent to SR plant. Crane collapse Licensee has full understanding of facility usage and requirements. These need to be transferred to a workable ‘brief’ Optimisation of design through Co-ordinated discipline teams Late changes leading to lack of clarity and rushed decisions Lack of coordination through disciplines leads to late alterations Implications of use of certain codes & Standards – More rigorous & unusual to contractor and sub contractors Contractor works to a normal industrial standard Unacceptable Quality Control Additional Notes Crane design, Crane platform , Lifting Coordinator, testing inspection Licensee will work with design house. Good communication facilitated by co-location of design team and licensee’s project team. Regular Interfaces Optioneering record sheet; development of design Co-ordinated design discipline reviews Appropriate modelling for areas of tight service interfaces/ penetrations Design complete prior to construction Design peer reviews Contractor checked for SQEP (prior to award, following award and throughout contract) – Assurance sought that people proposed at tender are available & subsequently used. Similar SQEP issue with sub contractors and sub- sub contractors staff and QA procedures Rigorous Site control with Design Input as required 19 Area for consideration Design specification leaves contractor scope to define alternative materials (“ or similar approved”) Attribute Contractor specifies unsuitable materials as he is not fully aware of design requirements Importance Materials do not fully justify safety case Additional Notes Thorough and complete checking by designer of contractors proposed materials. Design is difficult for the contractor to construct Contractor finds it time consuming or costly to construct Non-conformances Inevitable Contractor either cuts corners or proposes changes to design at late stage Can adversely affect design Design Changes Time / Availability Procurement Availability Contractor Proposals Errors/ mistakes- Non Conformances Oversights from original design Use of material acceptance/ proposal forms. Hold point approval Early involvement of contractor . – buildability input incorporated into design Recording of non conformances (No blame Culture) Understanding of issue in relation to safety case and specification Closing out of issues including up dating of as built records Clear limits of authority to accept changes & non conformances on behalf of licensee by others (Design House) A robust design change system of recording and acceptance 20 Area for consideration Records Attribute Appropriate records developed and maintained Importance Timely records developed to show continuity from design through construction in order to justify operational safety case Contractor methodology Contractor methods in some circumstances need to be validated against design assumptions Contractors methods may not align with original design assumptions Additional Notes Verification of design brief and specification are aligned (including codes, standards etc) Verification of appropriateness of codes/ standards to be adopted Certification of materials Verification of testing for proprietary items Verification that contractor selected materials are compliant with design intent Timely ’as constructed’ drawings including appropriate referencing to design changes Early engagement of contractor . – buildability input incorporated into design 21 References T/AST/039 ; Management for Safety T/AST/057 ; Design Safety Assurance 1. 2. 3. 4. 6. 7. 8. 9. T/AST/017 ; Structural Integrity, Civil Engineering Aspect T/AST/077 ; Procurement of nuclear safety related items or services , 5. Quality Assurance for Safety in Nuclear Power Plants and other Nuclear Installations, Codes and Safety Guides Q1-Q14, Safety Series No 50- C/SG Q, IAEA, Vienna 2001 Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 (as amended) The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999 10. IAEA guidance DS349, Management System for Nuclear Facilities 11. Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2006 rev 1. HSE 12. Not Used 13. American Concrete Institute (ACI 349/06) Code requirements for Nuclear Safety Related Concrete Structures. 14. Thirteenth report of SCOSS , The standing committee on Structural Safety 15. Construction workers for whom English is not their first language (Reg 13, 15 of The management of Health and Safety at work Regulations 1999 as amended) 16. Not Used 17. T/INS/012 ; technical inspection guide LC12 DAP’s and SQEP’s 18. Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) Reactor harmonisation working group, reference levels, Jan 2008. 19. CIRIA report T 30.001 Demolition, Dismantling and Decommissioning Rev 03 [Jan 09] , Designing to make management of hazards in Demolition, Dismantling and Decommissioning easier. 21. T/AST/049 , Technical Assessment Guide, Licensee use of Contractors and 20. Not used Intelligent Customer capability 22. UK CARES; url www.ukcares.com 23. American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC 360-05) Specification for structural steel buildings. 24. American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC 341-05) Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings. 25. American Institute of Steel Construction (ANSI/AISC N690-06 Specification for Safety Safety related structures for nuclear facilities. 22 26. Not Used 27. Not Used. Assurance. 28. T/INS/017; Site Inspection and enforcement guidance:LC17 Quality 29. Managing health and Safety in Construction – Construction (Design and Management ) Regulations 2007 Approved Code of Practice. 30. IAEA, NS-G-3.6; Geotechnical aspects of site evaluation and foundations for nuclear power plants. 31. British Construction Steelwork Association, BCSA, www.steelconstruction.org 32. International Masonry Society, IMS, www.masonry.org.uk 33. IAEA Safety Standard GS-R-3 The Management Systems for Facilities and Activities Safety Requirements 23 ns-tast-gd-023.pdf
 Title of document OFFICIAL ONR GUIDE 1 TO 8) CONTROL OF PROCESSES INVOLVING NUCLEAR MATTER (SAP – ENM. Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-023 Revision 5 Date Issued: August 2019 Review Date: August 2022 Approved by: Peter Donnelly Professional Lead Chemistry/chemical engineering Record Reference: Revision commentary: CM9 Folder 1.1.3.776. (2019/250250) Routine update incorporating changes in IRRs, Safeguards legislation and the introduction of the Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 4 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 5 6. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 10 7. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 11 8. APPENDICES.................................................................................................................... 12 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 08/19 Report NS-TAST-GD-023 Page 1 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL INTRODUCTION 1. 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.5 ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders where ONR is the Enforcing Authority. The principles presented in the SAPs are supplemented by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is one of these guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This Technical Assessment Guide provides guidance on ONR’s approach to the control of nuclear matter, the relevant legislative constraints and definitions and on the application of relevant ONR Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) [1], as described in section 4.1 below. Nuclear matter must be controlled to protect people from harm and to protect the environment, safeguard fissile material and to secure hazardous installations and materials. Harm may result from the radioactive properties of nuclear matter, or by combination of its radioactive properties with toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties. Recognition of the impact that? nuclear matter may have on safety is implicit throughout the SAPs. 2.3 The principal definition of nuclear matter used by ONR is that given in the glossary to the SAPs, based on the definition used in the Nuclear Installations Act (NIA): Subject to any exceptions prescribed in NIA and the Nuclear Installations (Excepted Matter) Regulations 2017[2], nuclear matter is: 1 any fissile material in the form of uranium metal, alloy or chemical compound (including natural uranium), or of plutonium metal, alloy or chemical compound, and any other fissile material which may be prescribed; 2 any radioactive material produced in, or made radioactive by exposure to the radiation incidental to, the process of producing or utilising any such fissile material as aforesaid. It should be noted that following the commencement of the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018 the definition of “qualifying nuclear material” overlaps the definition of excepted matter arising through NIA and as such, material that may meet the criteria to be considered as excepted matter may still be qualifying nuclear material for safeguards purposes. In any case involving such material, ONR Safeguards should be consulted. This guidance therefore applies to all types of nuclear matter, including excepted matter (see the Appendix) unless the wording makes it clear that limited application was intended, or unless it can be shown that the total amount of nuclear matter concerned is sufficiently small or is in such a chemical or physical form as to make it unnecessary to apply to any one or more of the SAPs. The SAPs require the identification of “all initiating faults having the potential to lead to ….. a significant quantity of radioactive material escaping from its designated place of residence or confinement” (fault analysis principle FA.2). Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 2 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 2.6 Interpretation of “control” should not be restricted to the need for control and instrumentation (C&I) systems. In this context, control relates to the ability to manage a hazardous material. However, the legislation does not define fully the type of control required, for example, Licence Condition (LC) 4 states only that “adequate arrangements” should exist for nuclear matter brought onto site. 2.7 The nature of the control required can be determined from a number of sources, including (in no particular order):         Legislation, primary and secondary. the nuclear site licence conditions . Published standards. ONR’s Safety Assessment Principles and Technical Assessment Guides. Comparison with relevant good practice in the UK and abroad. Good design and analysis of appropriate systems and equipment. Legal Guidance from ONR’s solicitors or legal advisory service. For material meeting the criteria to be “qualifying nuclear matter”, Safeguards requirements. This guidance covers the key concepts of inventory control. In this context, control should be applied proportionately and according to the meanings of relevant ONR guidance, for example on limits and conditions [3] and functional safety systems [4]. Nuclear matter has to be managed through all stages in the life-cycle of a facility and most of the SAPs will apply to nuclear matter at some stage. Many specific principles in other sub-sections are particularly relevant, e.g. containment and ventilation [SAP-ECV.1 to 10] and other guidance should be consulted for the assessment of equipment designs or specific operations. 2.10 On civilian sites, responsibilities for ensuring the security and safeguards of nuclear material are regulated by ONR Civil Nuclear Security and Safeguards (CNSS) Division1. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 3.1 Explicit reference to nuclear matter is found in LC 4 and 5. LC 4 is concerned with the necessity of “adequate arrangements” for bringing nuclear matter onto a licensed site and for its storage there. Arrangements covering issues addressed by the relevant SAPs and this guidance should be consistent with any relevant information in a Safety Case, and the advice herein will be useful in addressing such arrangements as well as other relevant aspects of safety cases as a whole. LC 5 is concerned with the regulatory control of consignments from a licensed site and the records required to be kept. Its main purpose is to ensure that HSE/ONR can identify destination sites for which a new licence might be needed. 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.3 1 Subject to the final position post-Brexit the period of shadow regulation may continue for a period. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 3 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.4 3.5 4.1 4.2 4.3 OFFICIAL Other laws and regulations affecting nuclear installations define the materials within their scope in slightly different ways. The appendix to this guide expands on the definitions. Since all the legislation described in the appendix requires some control over radioactive/nuclear material, this guidance is relevant to all nuclear legislation in varying degrees. LC 34 requires that licensees ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that radioactive material and radioactive waste on the site is at all times controlled or contained so that it cannot leak or otherwise escape. Assessment of arrangements to comply with this licence condition should therefore also take account of this guidance. Arrangements made under LCs 23 and 27 on operating rules and safety mechanisms may also be relevant in this respect. Arrangements for the periodic review of safety cases under LC 15 will also be relevant as such reviews should address aspects of control and containment, shortfalls against modern standards and the relevant overall site strategies for the control of nuclear matter. 3.6 As described in section 2 above, qualifying nuclear material for safeguards purposes may also be nuclear matter, as such, the views of ONR Safeguards should be sought wherever it is appropriate to do so. 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED SAPS This TAG provides guidance on SAPs ENM.1 to ENM.8 and their relationship with other parts of the SAPs. The SAPs in the ENM section specify control at increasing levels of detail, starting at ENM.1 (highest level) with planning and the management strategy for the site. ENM.2 then covers facilities and their safety cases, ENM.3 covers the design, implementation and operation of those facilities and ENM.4 covers the administration of those operations. The desirable attributes of material in facilities are defined in principles ENM.5 and 6. Finally, principles ENM.7 and ENM.8 are concerned with retrieval/inspection and accountancy of nuclear material. Additional applications of this guidance include: fuel handling on research reactors, waste handling on power reactors and reprocessing activities. Nuclear matter is subject to specific controls whilst in the core of a reactor [SAP ERC]. Reactor coolant must also be controlled to prevent damage to the core [SAP EHT, ERC.3 and ESS para 340]. SAPs ENM.2-8 also apply to radioactive waste and contaminated land where they present an equivalent hazard. For these materials, principles in the sections on radioactive waste management [RW.1 to 7] and contaminated land also apply [RL.1 to 8]. Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) Reference levels There are no specific WENRA reference levels relevant to this TAG, although those under Appendix E of the report of the Reactor Harmonisation Working Group on the Design Basis Envelope for Existing Reactors [5] are relevant to the associated engineering design provisions. The reference levels for Waste and Spent Fuel Storage are explicitly addressed in other TAGs (NS-TAST-GD- 024 and NS-TAST-GD-081) but the advice given in this TAG is consistent with this position. 4.4 IAEA Standards The concept of control in IAEA safety standards and guides covers all regulated radioactive material and not just nuclear material, but in general the Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 4 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL control of materials necessary for safety is not made explicitly in most IAEA documents. The Requirements Document on the Safety of Fuel Cycle Facilities [6] sets out relevant engineering design requirements and the Safety Guide which covers fire protection [7], provides relevant guidance where a failure to control may lead to a fire or explosion hazard. 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 Overall strategy ENM.1 states that a strategy should exist, to ensure that unwanted material is not generated and that matter is controlled to prevent harm and to ensure control can be maintained. The strategy should be consistent with current Government policy (such as Cmd. Paper 2919 and ref [8]) on such matters and comply with relevant statutory and applicable provisions, including relevant Licence Conditions as outlined above. The strategy should be compatible with individual safety cases and take a holistic view, especially with regard to inherent safety [EKP.1] [1]. The strategy should identify all routes for nuclear material both into and out of the site or facility. The latter should also comply with relevant legislation for transfers and disposals (the latter regulated by the EA and SEPA, see Annex 1 to the SAPs). The strategy should cover all relevant nuclear material irrespective of whether it has been declared to be nuclear waste. The strategy will take account of the lifetimes of plant and requirements for control consistent with safety cases. The strategy or safety cases should demonstrate any prolonged storage is safer than disposal, where a disposal route is available. In some circumstances, the radioactive matter will present a hazard long after the current facilities have reached the end of their useful life. The strategy should deal with this possibility and include appropriate cognisance of requirements during the “period of responsibility” [9] which may apply long after a site or facility ceases normal operations. Finally, strategy documents should be live documents, taking account of changes to circumstances. The following guidelines, together with other relevant SAPs [e.g. SC.6, DC.1 to 9], can be used in assessing this strategy. Some radioactive waste is also nuclear matter and the principles in the SAPs sub-sections on Radioactive Waste and Contaminated Land could also be relevant. Management Control SAP ENM.2 covers control at the level of organisational control over activities on a nuclear licensed site by a combination of engineered systems and managerial control procedures. The control will be justified in safety cases for all the relevant operations on the site, which define the safe operating envelope for the material. All activities involving nuclear matter are included and ENM.2 is not just restricted to the processing of nuclear matter. Control must be exercised when raw nuclear materials or intermediates are stored or moved on a site, while nuclear material is being processed and after treatment, prior to transport off- site for further treatment or disposal. There is no distinction between the standards of control required for radioactive feedstock or radioactive waste. The level of control will be related to the hazard, reliability demanded and the consequences of loss of control of any such material on workers and others. 5.5 In order to control processes involving hazardous substances it is necessary to understand the objectives of the process, the limits and conditions required to maintain safety and the physical and chemical properties of the substances being processed. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 5 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 OFFICIAL The need for control should be identified early in the safety case [particularly SC.3] and the SAPs specifically demand identification of faults leading to loss of control [FA.2]. The safety case should review the options for process selection; to eliminate hazards by minimising the inventory [SAP EKP.1 & Para 152] or prevention (i.e. minimisation or reduction of the frequency of the fault) or by mitigation of the consequences, in order of preference. This should be clearly identified in the options studies that are carried out at the time of process selection and should form part of the safety justification, usually at the preliminary stage. The effects of scale-up from experiments or different conditions during operation of earlier plant should be allowed for. There should be adequate provision to ensure that under normal and fault conditions nuclear matter is:  Cooled, monitored and controlled where the heat from radioactive decay or chemical reaction may be significant;  Managed so that chemical reactions, radiolysis, precipitation, acidity etc. are kept within the specified limits (see ECH.1 – ECH.4);  Segregated appropriately [see ENM.5]. The safety case should be developed (see [10]) through a structured analysis [SAP FA.2, EKP.4] including fault studies supported by probabilistic safety analysis where appropriate, see ONR guidance [11] on “Deterministic Safety Analysis and the Use of Engineering Principles in Safety Assessment”. The safety case should clearly identify the operating parameters [SAP- SC.6] which define the operating envelope and safety significant parameters which define the (LC 23) safety envelope and how each is derived; other ONR guidance applies. Specific consideration should be given to process transients due to start-up, shutdown, maintenance and foreseeable faults [FA.6]. This is to ensure that conditions during such phases are adequately covered by the control / safety system or administrative procedures. Such consideration may indicate the requirement for additional control during these phases. 5.10 Although the preference would be for passive then engineered control at all times, where this is not reasonably practicable, administrative safety measures may suffice, see EKP.5. 5.11 Control Features of Plant Inventories should be low enough to avoid adverse effects due to runaway reactions and buffer storage should be sufficient to eliminate process perturbations with safety implications, as recognised by ENM.2. Buffer storage that reduces sensitivity to faults should not be used for the prolonged storage of nuclear matter and its inventory of potentially harmful materials should be minimised consistent with the required functionality. There is a balance between achieving a robust process and minimising the inventory in buffer storage. 5.12 The site arrangements, layout and plant design should aim to avoid unnecessary movements of nuclear matter [EKP.3 and ELO.3] 5.13 Occasions when it is necessary to temporarily re-route nuclear matter include pressure relief and sampling. Continuous monitoring instrumentation may provide necessary data but in certain circumstances samples of the actual material may have to be taken. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 6 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.14 Monitoring of plant parameters should rely as far as is practicable on instrumentation that does not require nuclear matter to be diverted outside the main containment. OFFICIAL 5.15 If samples are needed, adequate consideration should be given to ensuring that samples are representative of the process to allow accurate measurement (ECH.4), whether or not routine control depends on the on-line or the off-line instruments. Account should be taken of potential problems due to phase separation, sample line deposition, condensation from gas streams, blockages, temperature and chemical changes, which may affect the composition of the sample being taken. 5.16 Where material must be re-routed, provision should be made to ensure the safe handling of the material [ECV.3 and 4] and its return to safe containment by: 1 Return to the process after use, or 2 Treatment, or 3 Storage, or 4 Disposal. 5.17 Whilst sampling should be avoided as a means for controlling dynamic systems, it may still be necessary to periodically retrieve smaller amounts of material over a longer timescale, in order to demonstrate compliance with a safety case. Whilst ENM.3 discourages sampling as a means of controlling dynamic processes, ENM.7 is a reminder that some sampling from longer-term storage may be necessary. 5.18 Facilities should be designed in a way that facilitates bulk recovery of material before they reach the end of their operational or design life or earlier if required by site strategies [e.g.: ENM.1 & RW.1]. ENM.7 states that facilities should be designed and operated so that material can be retrieved within an appropriate period of time, including intervention in the event of unexpected faults, accidents or degradation of packaging. (See also SAP-RW.5.) 5.19 The scope of SAP ENM.3 is broad; including not only systems for materials accountancy but also the design and operation of the facilities that control nuclear matter. Essentially, it builds on ENM.2 by considering the systems needed to provide control. 5.20 In some cases, adequate control may depend on the use of robust and auditable operating instructions and procedures. Accountancy measurements may provide further support. There is ONR guidance [12] on centralised systems to monitor materials movements and process conditions. 5.21 The fundamental principles SAP EKP.1 to 5 are relevant to design and operation of processes controlling nuclear matter. ONR expects systems providing safety functions to possess appropriate levels of redundancy, diversity and segregation from systems used for normal control [EDR.2], see ONR guidance on functional safety systems [12]. It should be shown that safety-related components can be operated and controlled within a safe operating envelope throughout their operating life. The parameters of the envelope should be consistent with the type of construction, potential modes of failure and operational considerations. 5.22 Monitoring and recording systems are necessary to detect problems that may develop in processes due to leakage, changes in temperature, chemical Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 7 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL reaction and other effects. The ESR and ESS sections of SAPs expand on the requirements for these systems. As well as leakage, effects including segregation, deposition and condensation can cause problems, see ENM.8. 5.23 Where practicable, safety systems, safety-related instrumentation and engineered controls should be designed to fail-safe. Failure should be revealed to the operator by alarms or other means. There may be a requirement for high levels of redundancy and diversity dependent on the reliability of each system. The problems associated with single failure criteria should be considered [EDR.4]. 5.24 The maintenance requirements of any monitoring and control equipment should be clearly identified [LC28] and in accordance with the arrangements made under the licence conditions. These should include calibration and ensure that the control system is always available when required. Similar maintenance is required for safety systems and safety related instrumentation [13] and this is addressed by ONR guidance. Attributes of Nuclear Material 5.25 ENM.5 and 6 outline physical and chemical characteristics that nuclear material should possess, for control to be achievable. Together with the process characteristics, these determine the precautions that need to be taken to ensure adequate control arrangements are in place. These should be documented e.g.: in flowsheets, safety functional requirements and the basis of design. These documents should be identified in the safety case. Such information will help to define the safety envelope within which the process is managed. 5.26 In some circumstances the identification and quantification of the materials being handled may not be possible. When this is the case, the arrangements should allow for the level of uncertainty and identify additional levels of control to maintain safety margins as required by the safety analysis. 5.27 Arrangements should be made and implemented (which may include examination, testing and auditing) to ensure that incoming material meets the acceptance criteria. Arrangements should also be established for the safe management of any incoming material that fails to meet the acceptance criteria. 5.28 Segregation in SAP paragraph 789 includes segregation both from incompatible materials and according to physical and chemical form, flammability, specific radioactivity, half-life, fissile nature and type of radiation emitted where subsequent storage, processing, conditioning and disposal would otherwise be adversely affected. 5.29 Passively safe conditions for storage should be used where reasonably practicable. Storage of material in a passively safe state still requires a safety case that identifies operational limits and conditions required for safety. Many of the paragraphs in SAP RW.5 also apply to ENM.6 and 7 for nuclear material. Where fissile material is present, no external controls should be relied upon to prevent criticality, see ECR.1 and ECR.2. The safety case should demonstrate acceptable sub-criticality margins for stores taking account of the uncertainties that may exist. Relevant factors may include:   form of the material; environmental conditions, contaminants; OFFICIAL including temperature, humidity, and Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 8 of 14 Office for Nuclear Regulation    5.30 heat generation (from individual items and the whole store); OFFICIAL gas generation (pressurisation, flammable mixtures, deformation); and radiological hazards, taking account of on-site storage and long term management, which may include disposal. In some circumstances, the inherent safety characteristics of the process reduce the potential hazard such that the control arrangements can be appropriately simplified. Accountancy & Display Systems 5.31 Principle ENM.4 expects records of nuclear matter to be generated and kept, this is also a fundamental Safeguards requirement in the case of qualifying nuclear material. ENM.8 requires this information to be processed and analysed in a timely manner in order to prevent any significant deviations from environmental, security or safety case criteria. 5.32 The arrangements for monitoring and relaying control and safety information to relevant staff should be clearly identified in the safety case. Thus the safety case should specify the periodicity of gathering and displaying such data. Display systems should be configured to provide an overview of the condition of the process including, where appropriate, mass and volumetric balance summaries. 5.33 Where plant safety must be maintained by appropriate and timely response to system alarms [EHF.7], the response should be automatic where reasonably practicable; however, where it is not, proportionate robust managerial control should be exercised. 5.34 The actions to be taken on failure of safety systems, safety related instrumentation and engineered control equipment should be clearly identified in the safety case and in instructions to workers. This advice should be incorporated in any on-site, off-site emergency or contingency instructions. In some circumstances the safety case may have to consider the need for local field control stations for normal control and in the event that the main control centre is not tenable. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 9 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 6. REFERENCES OFFICIAL 1. Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities. 2014 Edition Revision 10. ONR. November 2014 . http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/index.htm 2. The Nuclear Installations (Excepted Matter)Regulations 2017 (c920) 3. ONR, The Limits and Conditions for Nuclear Plant Safety, T/AST/035. 4. ONR, Safety Systems, T/AST/003. 5. Http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2014/09/19/wenra_safety_reference_l evel_for_existing_reactors_september_2014.pdf 6. IAEA Safety of Fuel Cycle Facilities; NS-R-5. 7. IAEA Protection Against Internal Fires and Explosions in the Design of Nuclear Power Plants; Safety Guide Safety Standards Series; NS-G-1.7. 8. UK Strategy for the Management of Solid Low Level Waste from the Nuclear Industry February 2016 9. Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (c57) 10. ONR, Purpose and Scope of Nuclear Safety Cases, T/AST/051. 11. ONR, Deterministic Safety Analysis and the Use of Engineering Principles in Safety Assessment Guidance, T/AST/006. 12. ONR, Computer Based Safety Systems, T/AST/046. 13. ONR, Safety Related Instrumentation, T/AST/031. Note: ONR staff should access internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management System and external references via Westlaw or Redgrave’s Online. At no time should reliance be placed upon printed copies or the links above unless these are confirmed to be current. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 10 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 7. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS BSL BSL(LL) BSO C&I CNS EA FA HSE IRR17 LC NIA ONR SAP SEPA TAG UKSO Civil Nuclear Security (Office for Nuclear Regulation) Basic Safety Level Basic Safety Level (legal limit) Basic Safety Objective Control and Instrumentation Environment Agency Fault Analysis Health and Safety Executive Ionising Radiation Regulations (2017) Licence Condition Nuclear Installations Act Office for Nuclear Regulation Safety Assessment Principle(s) Scottish Environment Protection Agency Technical Assessment Guide(s) United Kingdom Safeguards Office (Office for Nuclear Regulation) WENRA Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 11 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 8. APPENDICES OFFICIAL APPENDIX 1: EXCEPTED MATTER, THE NIA AND OTHER LEGISLATION A1.1 It is a fundamental premise that terms defined in the law underpinning our regulatory framework should be used consistently within our licence conditions and our guidance. A1.2 Nuclear Matter and Radioactive Material are terms defined in law. Nuclear site Licence Condition 1 states: “nuclear matter” has the meaning assigned thereto in the Nuclear Installations Act 1965; “qualifying nuclear material” has the meaning assigned thereto in the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018; For England and Wales : “radioactive material” has the meaning, disregarding the exceptions in paragraph 9 (contaminated articles or substances) and 9A of Part 2 of Schedule 23 to the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2016 (and amendments), given in paragraph 3 of that Part of that Schedule to those regulations. and “radioactive waste” has the meaning assigned thereto in paragraph 3 of Part 2 of Schedule 23 to the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2016 For Scotland : “radioactive material” and “radioactive waste” have the meanings given in Schedule 8 Part (1)(5) of the Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations 2018, noting that the definition of Radioactive Waste is broader than that given in EPR(E&W)2016. The differences between several of these definitions are expanded in Annex 1 of NS-INSP-GD-005 Revision 3 and are further explained (for England and Wales) in the guidance document “Scope of and Exemptions from the Radioactive Substances Legislation in England, Wales and Northern Ireland” It is important to note that not all definitions are aligned and Inspectors must therefore satisfy themselves that they have correctly identified which legislation and hence which definitions are applicable when operating in England and Wales, or in Scotland, and be guided as appropriate. A1.3 Definitions of radioactive material have appeared in UK legislation and international treaties since the Paris Convention was signed by the UK in 1960. Since then, the Nuclear Installations Act and other legislation covering radioactive waste, nuclear security and emergencies have defined radioactive materials in slightly different ways. To avoid over-regulation in areas where parliament did not intend, the legislation also specifies a number of exceptions to terms such as nuclear matter. Whilst this may seem complicated, such differences rarely impact on the work of nuclear inspection because there is considerable consistency the main distinguishing features and exceptions to the legislation. in practice. This appendix covers A1.4 The 1960 Paris Convention on nuclear liability uses the terms “nuclear fuel” and “radioactive product or waste” and seeks to identify responsibilities and Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 12 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL liabilities damage caused by occurrences involving such material. The NIA defines its subject matter as: Subject to any exceptions prescribed in NIA and the Nuclear Installations (Excepted Matter) Regulations 2017, nuclear matter is: any fissile material in the form of uranium metal, alloy or chemical compound (including natural uranium), or of plutonium metal, alloy or chemical compound, and any other fissile material which may be prescribed; and any radioactive material produced in, or made radioactive by exposure to the radiation incidental to, the process of producing or utilising any such fissile material as aforesaid. 1 2 A1.5 In the NIA, “excepted matter” means nuclear matter consisting only of one or more of the following, that is to say: isotopes prepared for use for industrial, commercial, agricultural, medical [scientific or educational] purposes; natural uranium; any uranium in which the isotope 235 forms not more than 0.72%; nuclear matter of such other description, in such circumstances as may be prescribed (or, for the purposes of the application of this Act to a relevant foreign operator, as may be excluded international agreement by the relevant foreign law). the operation of the relevant if any, from 1 2 3 4 A1.6 Excepted matter is nuclear matter. The Excepted Matter Regulations provide certain exemptions which apply outside of nuclear licensed sites. For definitions of terms such as “relevant foreign operator”, “radiation practice” etc., inspectors are referred to the source legislation. A1.7 The definition of “Radioactive Substance” in the Ionising Radiation Regulations (2017) is a much broader term than “Nuclear Matter”. A1.8 Under IRR17, where a radioactive substance is used in a practice, (where a practice means work involving the production, processing, handling, disposal, use, storage, holding or transport of radioactive substances), its activity should never be disregarded for the purposes of radiation protection where the activity concentrations exceed specified values as defined in the regulations. If further information is required regarding the interpretation of IRR17, please refer to an ONR radiation protection specialist inspector. A1.9 The term “sealed source” means a source containing any radioactive substance whose structure is such as to prevent, under normal conditions of use, any dispersion of radioactive substances into the environment, but it does not include any radioactive substance inside a nuclear reactor or any nuclear fuel element. A1.10 Nuclear Safeguards legislation defines nuclear material as fissionable material, source material or ore. Source material means material containing the mixture of isotopes occurring in nature. A1.11 Nuclear matter, as defined in the NI Act covers a subset of radioactive material as defined by the RSA, or radioactive substance as defined in IRR17. The environmental legislation (EPR 2016 and EASR 2018) makes a clear distinction between radioactive material and radioactive waste. The term radioactive material in the RSA should not be equated with the same phrase Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 13 of 14 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL in the NIA to conclude that waste is not nuclear matter. Radioactive waste can be nuclear matter if the definition for nuclear matter is fulfilled. A1.12 Inspectors should be able to identify situations where additional advice may be needed. The purpose of including the above definitions and exceptions is to explain how the legislation avoids obvious traps associated with materials that could cause little damage in human or environmental terms, whilst still achieving its aims. Report NS-TAST-GD-023 CM9 Ref: 2019/0250250 Page 14 of 14 OFFICIAL ns-tast-gd-026.pdf
 Title of document appendix ONR GUIDE DECOMMISSIONING Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Date Issued: September 2019 Review Date: September 2022 Approved by: Nicholas Blackburn Nuclear Liabilities Regulation Professional Lead Record Reference: CM9 1.1.3.978. (2019/144943 ) Revision commentary: Major rewrite of Sections 1 to 4 to reflect modern regulatory language and developments in decommissioning good practice. Restructuring of Section 5 to align with WENRA’s Safety Reference Levels. Incorporation of Checklists and Appendices into main body of the document Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 3 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 3 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 5 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 7 6. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 27 7. ABBREVIATIONS .............................................................................................................. 30 8. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 31 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 09/19 NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 2 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established its Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities (SAPs) [1] which apply to the assessment by ONR Inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders. The outcome of an assessment by ONR is to reach an independent and informed judgement on the adequacy of a nuclear safety case [2]. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guidance to further assist ONR’s Inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is one such guide [3]. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This TAG provides guidance to ONR Inspectors to advise and inform their regulatory judgements in relation to decommissioning at nuclear licensed sites. The TAG supplements the guidance in the SAPs [1], in particular principles DC.1 to DC.9 on decommissioning. The TAG has been written with due cognisance of relevant International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safety standards for the decommissioning of nuclear facilities [4] and the Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association (WENRA) Safety Reference Levels (SRL) for decommissioning [5]. Duty holders may refer to the TAG as a source of good practice, although the TAG should not be interpreted as a set of prescriptive legal requirements. The IAEA defines decommissioning as, “the administrative and technical actions taken to remove all or some of the regulatory controls from an authorised facility so the facility and its site can be reused” [6]. For the purposes of this guidance, delivery of decommissioning is assumed to start on cessation of operations and continues until the defined end-state has been demonstrably achieved. In the UK, decommissioning is carried out under the same legislative framework as the preceding steps in the lifecycle. The general legal duties and principles of nuclear safety, control of nuclear matter, radiological protection and conventional safety continue to apply to decommissioning. Consequently, the general advice provided in other TAGs continues to be relevant when a plant enters into decommissioning. This TAG focusses on the specific factors that are particularly important to consider in decommissioning, with references to the general advice where appropriate. Licensees may assign particular terms to stages of decommissioning, such as Post Operational Clean Out (POCO), Care and Maintenance (C&M), Surveillance and Maintenance (S&M) and Final Site Clearance. As ONR’s objectives in regulating decommissioning are outcome-focussed, this TAG is not prescriptive in respect of the terminology licensees may use. However, it is important for a licensee to provide clear definitions of the terms it applies, to ensure a common understanding of the intended approach amongst both its own staff and other stakeholders. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION Licence Conditions 3.1 All 36 standard Licence Conditions (LCs) [7] apply during decommissioning and are relevant to activities involving decommissioning on nuclear licensed sites. However, a number of LCs are of particular relevance:     4 6 15 17 Control of nuclear matter Documents, records, authorities and certificates Periodic review Management systems NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 3 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.6 3.7           18 22 23 25 28 32 33 34 35 36 Radiological protection Modifications Operating rules Operational records Examination, inspection, maintenance and testing Accumulation of radioactive waste Disposal of radioactive waste Leakage and escape of radioactive material and radioactive waste Decommissioning Organisational capability In addition to NIA65, the licensee must continue to comply with all other relevant statutory provisions arising under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 and subordinate legislation, including the Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017, Lifting Operations and Lifting Equipment Regulations 1998, and Control of Asbestos Regulations 2012. Some particularly important legislation in the context of decommissioning is highlighted below. Nuclear Reactors (Environmental Impact Assessment for Decommissioning) Regulations 1999 (EIADR) EIADR applies to decommissioning of all nuclear reactors that had a continuous thermal load above 1kW whose decommissioning started after the regulations came into force on 19th November 1999. EIADR can also apply to reactor decommissioning projects that commenced prior to 19th November 1999, in the event of a change or extension to the project that may have a significant adverse environmental impact. In the event of such a change, the licensee must apply to ONR for a determination as to whether a new environmental impact assessment is required and if so, the regulations apply thereon. 3.5 Specific guidance on EIADR is available at www.onr.org.uk/eiadr Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 (IRR17) apply to the use of ionising radiation in the workplace, with the intent of restricting exposure and limiting dose to the workforce and the public and apply throughout the lifecycle of a nuclear facility. Radiological protection has particular importance during decommissioning, due to the range of activities undertaken, inherent uncertainties and personnel entries into controlled areas when systems that provided protection during the operational phase have been retired. Specific regulations of particular relevance to decommissioning include, but are not limited to:    Regulation 8 (radiation risk assessments) Regulation 9 (restriction of exposure) Regulation 12 (dose limitation) 3.8 Further guidance is provided in NS-TAST-GD-038 (Radiological Protection) [3] and the Approved Code of Practice [8]. Construction Design and Management Regulations 2015 (CDM) 3.9 Decommissioning typically gives rise to significant challenges of a conventional safety nature, such as working at height, work in confined spaces, work with high temperatures, demolition of civil structures and export of large heavy items. 3.10 The CDM regulations provide the main legislative requirements in respect of the management of health, safety and welfare during construction projects. The relevance NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 4 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation of CDM to decommissioning is derived from the CDM definition of ‘construction work’ which includes:    The decommissioning, demolition or dismantling of a structure Removal of a structure, or of any product or waste resulting from demolition or dismantling of a structure, or from disassembly of prefabricated elements which immediately before such disassembly formed such a structure; Removal of mechanical, electrical, gas, compressed air, hydraulic, telecommunications, computer or similar services which are normally fixed within or to a structure 3.11 Specific guidance on CDM is available at www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l153 Environmental Legislation 3.12 Decommissioning results in significant quantities of radioactive wastes, which then need to be managed to the point of disposal. 3.13 The relevant environmental regulator – the Environment Agency (EA) in England, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) in Scotland, or Natural Resources Wales (NRW) in Wales – have responsibility for permitting the disposal of radioactive and non-radioactive wastes arising from site activities, and for regulating the site against the corresponding permit limits and conditions. 3.14 Inspectors on sites undertaking decommissioning should familiarise themselves with ONR’s Memoranda of Understanding with the environmental regulators [9] and supporting guidance [10], as well as the joint guidance document, “Basic Principles of Radioactive Waste Management” [11]. 4. 4.1 RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED The SAPs [1] provide ONR’s nuclear inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory judgements on the safety of activities, and include the legal duty to reduce risk so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP). The SAPs are split into sections relating to different aspects of nuclear safety. One section of the SAPs is dedicated to decommissioning and those principles are summarised here:        DC.1 – this principle relates to consideration of decommissioning during the planning, design construction and operation of a new facility, or modification to an existing facility to facilitate safe decommissioning. DC.2 – this principle relates to preparation and maintenance of a decommissioning strategy that is appropriately integrated with other relevant strategies. DC.3 – this principle relates to timing of decommissioning and justification of the continuing safety of the facility for the period prior to its decommissioning, with identification of any necessary remedial and operational measures to reduce the risk where this cannot be underpinned. DC.4 – this principle relates to preparation of a decommissioning plan that sets out how the facility will be safely decommissioned. DC.5 – this principle relates to facilities being passively safe before entering a care and maintenance phase. DC.6 – this principle relates to identification, preparation, update, retention and ownership of documents and records required for decommissioning purposes. DC.7 – this principle relates to arrangements for establishing and maintaining the decommissioning organisation to ensure safe and effective decommissioning. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 5 of 31           Office for Nuclear Regulation DC.8 – this principle relates to periodic review and modification to the management system prior to and during decommissioning. DC.9 – this principle relates to preparation of the decommissioning safety case to demonstrate the safety of the decommissioning plan and its associated decommissioning activities, which is to be kept up to date as the work progresses. 4.2 In addition to principles DC.1-DC.9, the following may also be of relevance to decommissioning assessments: RW.1 to RW.7 – these principles relate to the management of radioactive waste at all stages of the lifecycle of a facility. RP.1 to RP.7 – these principles relate to radiation protection and control of areas to limit spread of radioactive contamination. MS.1 to MS.4 – these principles relate to effective leadership and management which is crucial to maintain during decommissioning which is a dynamic state leading to progressive reduction in resource on the site. EAD.2 – this principle relates to provision of adequate margins to allow for ageing and degradation of SSCs. EMT.2 – this principle relates to frequency of examination, inspection, maintenance and testing of SSCs, which may need re-examination during decommissioning. ECE.26 – this principle relates to consideration of decommissioning at the design stage to ensure incorporation of features to facilitate decommissioning. RL.1 to RL.9 – these principles relate to land quality management which will likely become more prominent as decommissioning progresses towards final site clearance and release from regulatory control. FP.1 to FP.8 – these are the fundamental principles which underpin the SAPs and outline ONR’s expectations regarding responsibility, leadership and management for safety, optimisation of protection measures, safety assessment, limitation of risks to individuals and protection of present and future generations. 4.3 4.4 4.5 The SAPs form a complete document and Inspectors should consider them as a whole. Inspectors are advised to base their judgements not only on the decommissioning principles (DC.1 - DC.9) and the additional SAPs suggested above, but to consider the specific case under assessment and which other SAPs and associated TAGs may be relevant. This TAG therefore provides advice to inform assessments of licensees’ early considerations of decommissioning, in addition to the practical delivery of decommissioning that takes place after operations have ceased. NS-TAST-GD-005 [3] identifies the Western European Nuclear Regulators' Association (WENRA) Safety Reference Levels (SRL) as a source of Relevant Good Practice (RGP) for operating reactors, facilities in decommissioning and facilities for storage of radioactive waste and spent nuclear fuel. This TAG has therefore been benchmarked against the Decommissioning SRLs [5] and the guidance in Section 5 is structured in accordance with the SRL topic areas:     Safety Management System (SRLs D-01 to D-14) Decommissioning Strategy and Planning (SRLs D-15 to D-29) Conduct of Decommissioning (SRLs D-30 to D-49) Safety Verification (SRLs D-50 to D-62) 4.6 The most relevant IAEA [4] documents to decommissioning are:  Fundamental Safety Principles (SF-1) NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 6 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation      Decommissioning of facilities (GSR part 6) Safety Assessment for the Decommissioning of Facilities Using Radioactive Material (WS-G-5.2) Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants, Research Reactors and Other Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities (SSG-47) Decommissioning of Medical, Industrial and Research Facilities (SSG-49) Application of the Concepts of Exclusion, Exemption and Clearance (RS-G-1.7) 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM Responsibility during decommissioning (WENRA SRLs D-01 – D-04) 5.1 The site licensee retains prime responsibility for safety throughout the lifetime of facilities and activities. This responsibility cannot be delegated, as stated in SAP FP.1 [1]. This fundamental principle applies equally to decommissioning as it does to operations, therefore licensees are expected develop their organisation, resource levels, capabilities, strategies and administrative arrangements to ensure safety throughout the entire lifecycle. 5.2 When a facility enters decommissioning the licensee may need to broaden its base of decommissioning skills, knowledge and capability, which may result in an increase in deployment of specialist contractors. Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-049 (Licensee use of contractors and intelligent customer capability) [3] for general guidance and note the relevant requirements of the CDM Regulations, especially the responsibilities of the nominated Client and Principal Designer. 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 At all times, the licensee must ensure that it has sufficient in-house expertise and resource to manage and make informed decisions on issues affecting nuclear safety, and be able to demonstrate that it is an intelligent customer for any bought-in items or services as well as exercising adequate control and supervision of contractors working on the licensed site. Decommissioning can give rise to new safety challenges, which might require pre- existing systems to be augmented or reconfigured (e.g. ventilation). Inspectors should be mindful that delivery of decommissioning often requires elements of construction work and modifications to the existing plant, including the identification and management of any asbestos containing materials. Decommissioning arrangements therefore need to link with all relevant arrangements made under licence conditions other than LC35, for example LC22 (Modification or Experiment on Existing Plant). The UK Government expects all nuclear operators should take the steps necessary to ensure that adequate funds are in place to meet their decommissioning liabilities. Whilst ONR does not directly regulate financial provisions, ONR provides advice to other organisations and the government on the adequacy of the plans on which the financial provisions are based. Further information is provided in Appendix 1. Organisational Structure (WENRA SRLs D-5 – D-8) A licensee should retain adequate suitably qualified and experienced personnel (SQEP) to ensure nuclear safety throughout the full range of its business. In general this is achieved by developing a Nuclear Baseline, against which ONR’s overall expectations can be found in NS-TAST-GD-65 (Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline) [3]. 5.7 Decommissioning gives rise to cultural challenges with potential to undermine workforce morale, such as a high rate of staff turnover, loss of operational knowledge, widespread changes in role, a need to develop new skills, loss of employment, NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 7 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation increasing use of contractors and a constantly changing workface environment. It is therefore important for licensees to maintain a robust safety culture to underwrite the increased reliance on human performance that typically occurs when a plant transitions into decommissioning. 5.8 Inspectors should also refer to SAPs MS.1 to MS.4 [1] and TAGs NS-TAST-GD-061 (Staffing levels and task organisation), NS-TAST-GD-048 (Organisational capability) and NS-TAST-GD-080 (Challenge Culture, Independent Challenge Capability (including an Internal Regulation function) and the Provision of Nuclear Safety Advice) [3 for general guidance. 5.9 Inspectors may consider whether a licensee’s organisational structure is robust to the challenges that typically occur in respect of decommissioning, such as: 5.10 The licensee’s organisational structure should clearly identify:                 Loss of operational knowledge Quantification and retention of sufficient in-house resources, at a time of uncertain future employment prospects Management of uncertainties Pressures to achieve rapid hazard reduction Requirements for new skills, to progress decommissioning projects A need for greater flexibility as the workface undergoes significant change Increased reliance on administrative measures to deliver safety and a reduced extent of engineered protection Ensuring the licensee’s Nuclear Safety Committee exercises sufficient independent challenge of the overall decommissioning strategy in addition to scrutinising individual activities Responsibilities for ensuring decommissioning is conducted safely An intelligent customer capability for decommissioning wherever reliance is placed on contractors Recognition of the increased prevalence of conventional health and safety risks as decommissioning progresses Recognition of the importance of maintaining radiological protection standards throughout decommissioning Priorities for hazard reduction, which should be based on addressing the highest hazards and risks in a timely manner Project management arrangements, noting the scale and nature of decommissioning projects may vary considerably from those in the operational phase A reporting hierarchy, to allow any conflicts that could compromise safety during decommissioning to be resolved Adequate integration of all parts of the licensee’s organisation that contribute to decommissioning and management of the resulting wastes 5.11 Inspectors may consider whether the licensee’s organisational structure is sufficiently flexible to ensure safety as the anticipated progressive (and often rapid) change in plant status occurs during decommissioning, noting this should allow a precautionary approach to any inherent uncertainties. 5.12 Inspectors should also seek assurance that the licensee maintains adequate focus on the following throughout decommissioning:   Its leadership function, to provide adequate direction and oversight. An internal challenge function is sustained and appropriate to decommissioning. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 8 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation  Safety culture, to identify signs of deterioration (e.g. patterns of events or near- misses) and measures to address this should it be identified. Record and Knowledge Keeping (WENRA SRLs D-9 & D-10) 5.13 Licensees are required to make adequate provision for recording and preserving all the data and information that may be required in the future to ensure safe decommissioning on nuclear licensed sites for as long as such information may be required. 5.14 It is particularly important for licensees to recognise the value to decommissioning of accurate information on nuclear facilities, their radioactive inventory and the Systems, Structures and Components (SSCs) that contribute to safety. Licensees should ensure this data is kept up-to-date and maintained in a readily available format, which should align with the relevant decommissioning strategy and plan. In considering the scope of information to be retained, licensees should be cognisant of the unique objectives of decommissioning and how delivery of those objectives may drive different information needs to those of the operational phase. 5.15 LC 6 requires licensees to make adequate records to demonstrate compliance with each condition of the site licence, and to ensure that such records are preserved for a further 30 years. LC 25 requires licensees to ensure that adequate records are made a kept of the operation, inspection and maintenance of nuclear facilities, which will include the decommissioning phase of the lifecycle of a facility. 5.16 The record preservation period of 30 years reflects the requirements of NIA65 with respect to third party liability. This period starts from the time when decommissioning or decontamination of the plant is complete and all radioactive waste has been transferred to another location or disposed of. 5.17 Inspectors should seek evidence that licensees have put arrangements in place to ensure knowledge of its facilities and inventory are maintained in a secure and accessible form, noting the potentially long timescales over which decommissioning can take place. 5.18 For general guidance, Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-027 (Training and assuring personnel competence), NS-TAST-GD-79 (Licensee design authority capability), NS TAST-GD-061 (Staffing levels and task organisation) and NS-TAST- GD-033 (Dutyholder management of records) [3. 5.19 The joint ONR/EA/SEPA/NRW guidance on management of higher activity radioactive wastes [12] provides further guidance on managing information and records relating to radioactive waste, some of which may be relevant to decommissioning. 5.20 Inspectors should confirm that the licensee has recognised the need to capture information of relevance to decommissioning, starting from the design stage and continuing through the whole life-cycle. The most valuable information to decommissioning typically includes:       Design and construction records describing the as-built situation. Material choices and process criteria. Operational history (e.g. use of the facility, historic events and incidents, radionuclide fingerprint). Radiological characterisation data (e.g. radionuclide inventories, dose rates and contamination levels). Physical condition of the facility, including examination, maintenance, inspection and testing records. Underground services. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 9 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation        Reinforcing arrangements. Established degradation mechanisms (e.g. corrosion, embrittlement). Asbestos surveys to inform an appropriate management strategy. Any instances of partial decommissioning or POCO, the end state that was achieved and when (e.g. capped off pipework). Waste inventory and location. Significant plant modifications. Location and function of any concealed (eg buried) systems. 5.21 In considering the timeframe for record retention the licensee should recognise that some records may need to be maintained beyond the completion of decommissioning. Implementation of a management system (WENRA SRLs D-11 – D-14) 5.22 An organisational structure should be in place for the management and implementation of decommissioning, with clear responsibilities for ensuring that decommissioning is conducted safely. 5.23 Further guidance on ONR’s expectations for an effective management system is provided in NS-INSP-GD-017 (Management Systems) [13], NS-TAST-GD-048 (Organisational capability) and NS-TAST-GD-065 (Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline) [3]. 5.24 In response to events of significance to safety at any point during the lifecycle, arrangements should be in place to conduct reviews as soon as practicable, in accordance with LC7. Inspectors should be aware that a significant radiological release may require amendment to the extant decommissioning strategy or undermine the ability of a site to meet the previously assumed end state. 5.25 The arrangements for controlling any modifications to the decommissioning strategy, methodology, programme or procedures should include an assessment of the safety implications associated with any such changes. DECOMMISSIONING STRATEGY AND PLANNING Facilitating decommissioning during design, construction and operational phase (WENRA SRLs D-15 & D-16) 5.26 The requirements for decommissioning should be considered at all phases in the overall lifecycle of the facility, starting at the planning and design phase. 5.27 Although the practical delivery of decommissioning is the last stage of a nuclear facility’s lifecycle, planning and preparation for decommissioning should occur with an appropriate level of detail from the moment design commences. 5.28 Targeted consideration of decommissioning during the preceding lifecycle stages can significantly reduce the risks and costs of delivering decommissioning. Throughout the steps of design, construction, commissioning, maintenance and operation, the evaluation of options should consider the potential impacts on future decommissioning – licensees should take the opportunity to reduce the challenges and risks of future decommissioning wherever it is reasonably practicable to do so. 5.29 Licensees should take steps to secure a smooth transition out of the operational phase into decommissioning, which firstly requires development of a clear and comprehensive decommissioning strategy and plan. The safety case should be proactively managed, initially to avoid breaches of operating rules and the maintenance schedule as plant runs down. Adequate safety margins will need to be sustained as the engineered systems that provided protection during the operational phase are taken out of service and removed. Decommissioning can also require NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 10 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation development of new capabilities, such as large-scale waste stores, an enhanced scope of characterisation and a process of exemption and clearance to address large volumes of demolition waste and spoil. 5.30 Therefore before entering into decommissioning, licensees should carefully consider the choreography between; cessation of operations; characterisation of the facility and its inventory; removal of the inventory; a precautionary approach to any inherent uncertainties; determination of the target end state and any preceding interim states, and; deployment of reasonably practicable measures to ensure the safety of workers as decommissioning tasks are delivered. 5.31 National and international experience has shown that many of the challenges and risks of decommissioning legacy nuclear facilities could have been significantly reduced or avoided, had the initial design and operational philosophy given greater thought to the needs of future decommissioning. 5.32 In the case of new facilities, Inspectors should check that the licensee’s arrangements and processes recognise the need to challenge the design in order to reduce the risks of future decommissioning to as low as reasonably practicable (ALARP). Practical examples include:            Selection of materials and surface finishes that minimise activation and the ingrowth of radioactivity while aiding decontamination. Provision of lay down areas and temporary storage. Accommodate the needs of decommissioning into the scope of downstream waste management facilities, to avoid bottlenecks, logistical delays and unnecessary double handling. The design of civil structures should provide for long-term stability over the timescales envisaged for decommissioning to be completed. Minimise the use of embedded piping and the potential for chronic leaks and escapes, for example by routing piping in accessible areas and using double containment for pipes that have to traverse concrete walls or floors. Construction methods should take cognisance of the fact that the facility will ultimately have to be decommissioned, noting that some modern techniques are not easily reversible. Use of building information modelling (BIM) where appropriate. Incorporation of design features to aid the decommissioning sequence, for example egress routes for removal of large heavy items and provision of cranes with sufficient lifting capacity to deal with the largest expected loads from decommissioning. Provision of extra space and localised ventilation points around process vessels, to simplify the logistics of size reduction and export at the end of life. Use of easily removable modular plant, which may benefit both decommissioning and preceding maintenance. Development of robust asset management arrangements, ideally in accordance with the relevant international standard, and of appropriate systems for monitoring the condition and health of facilities. 5.33 Further guidance on ONR’s expectations for the demonstration of ALARP is provided in NS-TAST-GD-05 [3]. 5.34 Inspectors should ensure the licensee has undertaken adequate site baseline surveys to inform the proposed strategy and end-state for decommissioning, including but not limited to: the radiological conditions, presence and condition of asbestos bearing materials, and condition of civil structures. Baseline surveys should consider both surface and subsurface conditions as well as groundwater. For existing sites without such survey data, then data from analogous, undisturbed areas with similar characteristics should be used. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 11 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation Decommissioning strategy (WENRA SRLs D-17 & D-18) 5.35 Each UK nuclear operator is expected to produce and maintain a decommissioning strategy and plan for each site it is responsible for. Such strategies and plans should take into account the views of stakeholders (including relevant local authorities and the public). The strategy should be to a level of detail commensurate with the type and status of the facility, the hazards presented and the stage in the lifecycle. 5.36 Strategies should consider all ‘relevant factors’, presenting them in a transparent way and demonstrating objectively how each has been reflected in the adopted approach. Examples of ‘relevant factors’ are listed in UK government policy and include:            Ensuring worker and public safety. Maintaining site security. Minimising the generation of radioactive wastes. Effective and safe management of the radioactive wastes that are created. Minimising environmental impacts including reusing or recycle materials whenever practicable. Maintaining adequate site stewardship. Using resources effectively, efficiently and economically. Providing adequate funding. Maintaining access to an adequate skills and knowledge base. Conducting research and development (R&D) to develop necessary knowledge or capability. Consulting appropriate public and stakeholder groups on the options considered and the contents of the strategy. 5.37 The future intended use of the site is a significant factor in determining the scope and end state for decommissioning. 5.38 5.39 Inspectors should be aware of relevant government strategies and policies, in conjunction with this TAG and other regulatory expectations, when considering the adequacy of a licensee’s decommissioning strategy. Although ONR does not enforce government policy, inspectors should regulate in accordance with the framework of government policy whilst ensuring that national law and regulatory requirements are met. Inspectors should assess whether the licensee’s decommissioning strategy is consistent with relevant national policies and strategies. Management of radioactive wastes and nuclear decommissioning are devolved matters, so government policy can vary between England, Scotland and Wales. Licensees should identify and justify any differences. 5.40 The licensee is expected to review its strategies periodically, and in response to any significant change in circumstances. An up-to-date decommissioning strategy is an established regulatory expectation of a robust periodic review of safety (NS-TAST-GD- 050 and SRL D72). 5.41 Inspectors should consider whether the licensee’s decommissioning strategies, programmes and plans adequately demonstrate a systematic and progressive reduction of hazard. This does not mean that hazards must reduce year on year, but that in the long term hazards progressively reduce to a level where decommissioning can be considered complete in terms of reaching the defined end state for the relevant facility or site. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 12 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.42 Inspectors should consider whether the strategy is sufficiently integrated at facility and site levels, if and when appropriate, for example: The decommissioning strategy should be linked to, or integrated with, the strategy for the management of existing radioactive waste from the site(s) and radioactive waste that will be produced during decommissioning. Key interactions and interdependences are taken into account within the planning process, e.g. any shared reliance on equipment, services and infrastructure. Where decommissioning is reliant on, or affected by, work at other sites (for example treatment, storage or disposal of radioactive waste) then the strategy should address these interdependences. Fleet considerations may also be appropriate if the Licensee operates multiple site licenses. Consideration of factors external to the licensee should also be evident, such as confirmation that wastes anticipated to be generated meet the relevant meet for the intended waste route, or that suitable transport packages have been identified. 5.43 Inspectors should consider whether the licensee has examined an adequate range of options for decommissioning and confirm that these form the basis of the licensees decommissioning strategy. The optioneering process should be based on appropriate assessment criteria. The assessment criteria should be defined and developed by the licensee, but inspectors may want to make a comparison with the list of relevant factors in the SAPs under principle DC.3 (timing of decommissioning). 5.44 In particular inspectors should also consider whether the following factors are included in the option selection criteria: How options deliver longer-term risk reduction. The dis-benefits of not pursuing any particular option. Avoiding the foreclosure of options for later decommissioning stages, particularly where there are uncertainties associated with the possible success of options. 5.45 Inspectors should consider how the option selection process addresses the major assumptions and uncertainties relevant to the decommissioning task or project being considered. Sensitivity analysis and contingency planning should be considered for any areas of significant uncertainty. 5.46 The licensee’s strategy and plans need to be in evidence, but should be at a level of detail commensurate to the current stage in the lifecycle. These should deliver the desired outcome of risk-reduction. Hence, prioritisation of activities should be in line with achievement of risk reduction. 5.47 However, prioritisation should take account of other considerations where relevant and justified. Examples might include: Enabling tasks may be required to facilitate future risk reduction, e.g. in the installation of decommissioning infrastructure. In some cases dismantling of lower risk systems/facilities may be required or beneficial in creating the space and access necessary for other decommissioning operations, or to provide training and experience. Where age limiting features dictate the early removal of a lower risk system or facility in preference to a higher risk one. Value and cost-benefit arguments, i.e. efficiency. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 13 of 31             Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.48 Licensees may have their own prioritisation process, but inspectors should look to see that key prioritisation decisions have been appropriately justified, whichever process the licensee has adopted. 5.49 Decommissioning strategies may take account of the benefits of radioactive decay (e.g. cobalt in reactor steelwork) while taking due cognisance of any dis-benefits, such as ingrowth of longer-lived or higher dose-rate daughter radionuclides and potential for deterioration of containment barriers. They should seek to avoid the creation of radioactive wastes in forms that may reduce the number of options for safe and effective long-term waste management. 5.50 The timescales over which decommissioning will take place should be defined in a decommissioning programme . Decommissioning programmes should deliver the desired outcome of risk-reduction and prioritisation of activities should be in line with achievement of this principle. The licensee should explain the timescales for these programmes / projects. 5.51 When assessing such justifications inspectors should take into account the relevant factors listed in the SAPs [1] under principle DC.3 which may be influencing the licensees proposed strategy. This list of factors is applicable to all types of nuclear facilities. 5.52 When justifying the timing of decommissioning it is good practice for the licensee to undertake appropriate stakeholder engagement. 5.53 Decommissioning tasks typically lead to the generation of radioactive waste in solid, liquid or gaseous forms and may result in short-term increases in discharges of some radionuclides. In such circumstances, the licensee will need to demonstrate to the relevant environmental regulator that the adopted strategy represents an optimal approach and reflects the application of Best Available Techniques (BAT), as required by the relevant environmental legislation. 5.54 Decommissioning may proceed as a continuous activity, or as a series of sequential stages, the end result of each stage being a significant reduction in hazard. The order, timing and extent of each stage will be influenced by the hazard posed by a particular facility on a site. Licensees should adequately justify of the order and timescales over which it proposes to address each hazard. 5.55 In general, Inspectors should expect the licensee to prioritise the removal and/or immobilisation of the most active or mobile material to be carried out on the shortest practicable timescale, with further actions following with timescales appropriate to the remaining hazards they address. In some circumstances, actions may be required that temporarily increase risk to enable hazard reduction to take place. In such circumstances the licensee should justify its overall approach and ensure that risks are reduced ALARP across all stages. 5.56 Inspectors should recognise the risks associated with particular decommissioning tasks can be increased due to the presence of uncertainty or specific safety challenges, e.g. accessibility or confined space working. 5.57 Adequate arrangements should include the production and maintenance of strategies, programmes and plans for the decommissioning of all nuclear facilities for which the licensee is responsible, including the future management and disposal of all the radioactive waste arising from the site. These should take into account government policy and related national strategies, for example on decommissioning or radioactive waste management and disposal. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 14 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.58 There are inherent uncertainties in decommissioning. Inspectors should look to see that a licensee’s arrangements, strategies and safety cases adequately take account of these, with appropriate mitigation and contingencies put in place. 5.59 Inspectors should give careful consideration to assessing arrangements, strategies, programmes and safety cases involving facilities where the risks are intolerable, close to becoming intolerable, or may soon become intolerable. In addition to the guidance given throughout this TAG, inspectors should particularly consider the following:         How the Licensee’s longer-term strategy and plans should deliver the desired outcome of large-scale hazard and risk reduction over an appropriate period of time. How short-term hazard and risks will be managed and longer-term hazard and risk reduction achieved. Regulatory monitoring of enabling milestones is required to provide evidence that projects are progressing as agreed, given that projects may run over many years to reach the desired outcome. The Licensee should have a clearly defined, robust, but not overly bureaucratic process for managing risk-reducing projects. This should focus on delivering safe and timely remediation of high-risk hazards. The principle of defence-in-depth with a suitable number of barriers should be applied. Inspectors should acknowledge that some levels of defence-in-depth will not be available in certain circumstances, and that mitigation will have to be strengthened where protection is missing or rudimentary. The worst-case accident scenarios need to be identified to allow adequate protection or mitigation and recovery measures to be developed. Simultaneous high-risk activities on the same facility or related facilities should be avoided so far as is reasonably practicable, i.e. to prevent the occurrence of one fault leading to the initiation and progression of another(s). This should include consideration of any foreseeable beyond-design-basis fault progression, as illustrated by the Fukushima incident. Clear mitigation/contingency measures need to be provided and developed to an appropriate level against fault sequences assigned a high probability of occurrence. However, for some legacy facilities it needs to be recognised that emergency response/contingency measures will be an essential part of the safety demonstration, given the absence of some of the levels of protection that would be in place in a modern plant. These should not be the sole safeguard against identified fault scenarios, so far as is reasonably practicable. Operating and emergency procedures/instructions should recognise and address key issues and identified fault sequences related to the implementation of a proposed modification to ensure measures are tailored to specific circumstances. Review of Decommissioning Strategies 5.60 In 1995 the UK Government issued a policy statement [14] that introduced a responsibility on ONR (the then Nuclear Installations Inspectorate of HSE) to review the decommissioning strategy of each UK licensee at least every 5 years, which became known as the Quinquennial Review process (QQR). 5.61 In recognition of the creation of NDA, the UK Government revised its decommissioning policy in 2004 [15] and therein supported continuance of the QQR process, except where “equivalent arrangements” are made, e.g. by the NDA. 5.62 The Energy Act 2004 requires NDA to review its strategy at least every 5 years and to undertake statutory consultation with the public and regulators. ONR has therefore scrutinised each revision of NDA’s strategy to date and interprets this to be an ‘equivalent arrangement’ to QQR for the licensed sites owned by NDA. As a consequence, individual QQRs are no longer carried out at sites in the NDA estate. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 15 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.63 The operators of sites owned by NDA are required through their contracts with NDA to produce and maintain detailed plans to a prescribed format that covers the whole site lifecycle, including decommissioning. These plans are reviewed regularly and summaries of the extant plans are made available on NDA’s website. 5.64 A range of other bodies now have interests in decommissioning strategies across portfolios of sites outside the NDA estate (e.g. the Nuclear Liabilities Fund in respect of EdF; the Nuclear Liabilities Funding Assurance Board in respect of new build, and; MoD in respect of its liabilities on the defence sites). Each of these bodies has bespoke expectations for licensees within its remit, some of which have a formal basis in law (e.g. the requirement of the Energy Act 2008 for an operator of a new nuclear power station to have a Funded Decommissioning Programme approved by the Secretary of State prior to construction). 5.65 In judging whether alternative approaches constitute an ‘equivalent arrangement’ to QQR, Inspectors should consider whether ONR has exercised sufficient oversight of the decommissioning strategy in question to discharge the responsibility placed upon ONR in Government policy without recourse to an additional formalised review. This judgement should take account of outcomes from other regulatory interventions, such as compliance inspections against the requirements of LC15 and LC35 or assessments for the purposes of EIADR. Facility decommissioning plan during design, construction and operational phases (WENRA SRLs D-19 – D-25) 5.66 Initial strategies, programmes and plans should:          Demonstrate that decommissioning can be feasibly and safely conducted using proven techniques or ones being developed. Take into account expected hazards and health & safety issues. Incorporate design for decommissioning features. As far as practicable, the design should take account of features which may assist future decommissioning, including contamination and activation control, and aim to avoid features which will introduce unnecessary decommissioning hazards, e.g. construction techniques which would be difficult to reverse. The key decommissioning measures and design features should be described and justified by the Licensee. Such measures may need to be considered on balance with construction and operational safety considerations. Include waste management and environmental aspects of decommissioning, such as management of waste and radioactive effluents. Inform the design process and vice versa. ALARP considerations should also be apparent (appropriate to the design stage). Be used to inform the development of the construction arrangements and the operational and maintenance regimes where appropriate. These should take due account of the needs of decommissioning, including features to facilitate decommissioning, providing for the early acquisition and maintenance of the records most important for decommissioning, and adoption of physical and procedural methods to prevent the spread of contamination. Building information modelling can be a very useful tool for this purpose. Be used to provide a basis to assess the costs of the decommissioning work and the means of financing it. 5.67 Inspectors should expect to see initial plans developed at the planning phase of a new site or facility. These should be commensurate with the scale of the facility, the type of the inventory, and the stage in the facility’s development i.e. proportionate and fit for purpose. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 16 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.68 Some legacy facilities may not have had strategies in place from this early stage. In these cases, inspectors should expect these to be produced based upon sufficient characterisation of the site / facility and the challenges which decommissioning will need to address, i.e. an appropriate understanding of the start point condition. 5.69 Generally, inspectors should expect an increase in the level of detail presented in the decommissioning strategies and plans as the facility or site nears the end of its operational life and approaches the decommissioning phase. 5.70 Examples of how this may apply in looking at safety cases are:   Inspectors should recognise that application of the engineering hierarchy and substantiation of safety measures to a level required for modern operating plants may not be practicable or desirable for aged facilities due to undergo decommissioning. Therefore, there is likely to be reliance on multi-legged arguments and managerial safety measures. These should be proportionate to the hazards. The principle of defence–in-depth with a suitable number of barriers should be applied (as appropriate to the risks involved). Inspectors should acknowledge that some levels of defence-in-depth will not be available in certain circumstances and that mitigation will have to be strengthened where protection is missing or rudimentary. 5.71 Optimisation is the term used by the IAEA in its Fundamental Safety Principles: Safety Fundamentals [3] where principle 5 states, “Protection must be optimised to provide the highest level of safety that can reasonably be achieved.” 5.72 5.73 In order to comply with UK legislation, licensees are required to apply the concept of “optimisation” in order to reduce risks to health and safety so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP) in addition to utilising Best Available Techniques (BAT) in respect of environmental protection. ONR’s guidance on the demonstration ALARP (NS-TAST-GD-005) [3] and its supporting references contain ONR’s general expectations in respect of a licensee’s demonstration that it has met the requirement to reduce risks SFAIRP, which is frequently expressed in terms of reducing risks ALARP. In respect of decommissioning, there are some specific aspects of optimisation that ONR might expect to be addressed as part of a licensee’s arrangements to comply with LC35. The precautionary principle should be applied to the uncertainties that often need to be managed during decommissioning. NS-TAST-GD-005 [3] provides detailed guidance on this topic. Another important aspect relates to the potentially long timescales involved, and hence the increased importance of economic, social and environmental factors such as sustainable development and long-term environmental damage. Final decommissioning plan (WENRA SRLs D-26 – D-28) 5.74 Strategies, programmes, plans and safety cases should be well developed and in place before decommissioning starts. Inspectors should check that there is no gap between the operational and decommissioning arrangements and that there is an appropriate interface between the two, where this is relevant. 5.75 Inspectors should consider whether the decommissioning strategy proposes appropriate end state conditions for the facility or site that are consistent with national policies and regulatory expectations. 5.76 One possible end state is where all licensable activity has ceased, the licence is revoked or handed back and the period of responsibility under NIA1965 has been NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 17 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation ended. This is referred to as de-licensing and inspectors are referred to ONR’s separate guidance on this [20]. 5.77 However this is not a mandatory requirement and other end states are possible in which some restriction on future use and continued legal responsibilities under nuclear legislation continue. 5.78 In some cases interim states may be identified. These should be treated as milestones within the overall decommissioning plan and are not end states as covered by this section of the guidance. The overall strategy/programme should show how decommissioning will progress safely beyond such interim states. 5.79 The precise format of the decommissioning programme is for the Licensee to propose and justify, but Inspectors should expect the following aspects to be adequately considered:               A defined inventory of the plants and liabilities, e.g. radiological inventory, (or a predicted inventory for those plants not at the end of their operational life). The rationale for selecting the chosen decommissioning option. The rationale for the proposed timing of decommissioning. Defined end state criteria (and the methodology for subsequently confirming that these criteria have been achieved). A description of the decommissioning activities (including the content of the individual stages), if a staged approach is applied. Where appropriate decommissioning should be divided into stages, in which case ONR may specify where consent is required to commence a stage or to proceed from one stage to the next. A Post Operational Clean Out (POCO) strategy. Arrangements for asset management during the decommissioning process. If the plans include a deferment of decommissioning with an associated care and maintenance period, the arrangements should include procedures and plans to maintain safety during the care and maintenance period. Such arrangements must include plans to manage any risks arising to the health and safety of workers, such as those arising from asbestos containing materials. Appropriate technical underpinning of the decommissioning methodology, including any key assumptions. Identification of any relevant Research and Development (R&D) requirements or opportunities, e.g. technology developments. Identification of the need for facilities to carry out decommissioning and waste management, including potential use of supply chain capabilities for treatment. A safety case justification, including the identification of safety and radiation protection measures/strategies. The overarching strategy for safety management systems should also be evident, and will identify existing facilities and equipment that will be used during decommissioning and any necessary changes to the existing safety systems, or the need for replacement or new plant or equipment to carry out decommissioning operations. The management arrangements to ensure safe delivery of the decommissioning projects, including arrangements for the management of change within the organisation during decommissioning. Decommissioning plan update during decommissioning operations (WENRA SRL D-29) 5.80 Inspectors should assess whether arrangements for decommissioning include appropriate review and change control procedures for the decommissioning programmes, plans, safety cases and procedures. Reviews should take place at least as frequently as the periodic safety review as required under LC15, but an increased NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 18 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation frequency may be necessary to reflect the progressive change in plant status, hazards or decommissioning approach as decommissioning progresses. 5.81 Changes which could warrant a review and subsequent modification of plans and programmes may include (but are not limited to):          Significant changes to the facility (physical, ageing, inventory, etc), including changes resulting from the decommissioning operations. Improved plant characterisation data, resulting from plant characterisation tasks. Significant changes to the decommissioning processes or strategy adopted; e.g. those that o Significantly affect the safety of the overall decommissioning programme; o Significantly affect the time in which decommissioning will be completed o Significantly affect the way in which decommissioning will be carried out, e.g. the use of new, untried or significantly different methods to those assessed previously; o Significantly affect the way in which radioactive waste will be dealt with, e.g. different disposal options or new methods of waste treatment; or o Change the proposed end state Major deviations from the scheduled programme. Major deviations in the assumed status of the facility, e.g. in light of new characterisation data. In particular the identification of new hazards or significant changes to the assessed consequences of hazards. Relevant operational feedback, or changes in relevant good practice. New or revised legislative or regulatory requirements. Significant technological developments or opportunities. Availability of anticipated external resources such as transport flasks, storage facilities or available disposal routes. CONDUCT OF DECOMMISSIONING Safety classification (WENRA SRL D-30) 5.82 As decommissioning progresses, there may be a change in the importance of designated SSCs to safety. It may therefore be appropriate to declassify or downgrade SSCs not required post-operations, or as decommissioning transitions between phases, provided this is justified in an update of the safety case. Conversely, some SSCs may become more important, or new SSCs may even potentially be required to support decommissioning operations. 5.83 Inspectors should consider the sufficiency and appropriateness of any remaining SSCs to the operations planned during subsequent phases of decommissioning. It is desirable for the licensee to minimise its reliance on active safety systems to maintain adequate safety margins during any C&M phase(s). 5.84 Further guidance is contained within NS-TAST-GD-094 (Categorisation of safety functions and classification of structures and components) [3]. On-site emergency preparedness (WENRA SRLs D-31 – D-34) 5.85 The licensee’s emergency planning arrangements should be updated to reflect the changing hazard as the site transitions from operations through the various stages of decommissioning, such that the arrangements remain appropriate to the current state of the plant. 5.86 Amendments to the emergency plan associated with decommissioning typically result in a reduced scope of available on site resource, with increasing call for off-site responders to support the emergency organisation. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 19 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.87 Guidance on licensee’s arrangements for emergency preparedness are covered elsewhere under specific guidance, such as NS-INSP-GD-011 (LC11 Emergency arrangements) [16] and the new Approved Code of Practice (ACoP) to the Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2019 [17]. Decommissioning experience feedback (WENRA SRLs D-35 – D-37) 5.88 The licensee’s arrangements should include procedures to identify, screen, analyse, and document events, at the facility and from external sources, in a systematic way to improve and ensure safe decommissioning. Inspectors should ensure that operational feedback is appropriately considered within the decommissioning safety case. 5.89 This feedback may come from events during decommissioning, or from other facilities operated by the licensee. Inspectors should look to see that feedback from events prior to decommissioning is included, for example findings of differences between “as built” plant and the design drawings, past plant modifications, incidents, spillages etc. Learning from post-project reviews should also be considered and incorporated as appropriate. Additional feedback can be sourced from other operators and wider industry organisations, both national and international. 5.90 The licensee’s duties under LC7 are unchanged during the decommissioning phase of the lifecycle, to notify record and investigate incidents on the site. Where learning points are identified following investigation of an event with significance for safety, appropriate corrective actions should be implemented to prevent reoccurrence of similar events or address other developments adverse to safety. Waste management (WENRA SRLs D-38 – D-40) 5.91 Decommissioning generally results in a broader range of wastes than the preceding phases of the lifecycle, in terms of physical characteristics, radiological contents, chemo-toxic properties and the volumes arising. The licensee should therefore consider the need to strengthen its waste management infrastructure and processes prior to undertaking decommissioning, to ensure all the anticipated wastes will be managed in accordance with regulatory expectations such as LC32 and the Joint Guidance on management of Higher Activity Wastes. 5.92 The licensee should adopt a precautionary approach to any inherent uncertainties in respect of its decommissioning wastes and put in place contingency arrangements against potential cliff-edge effects (e.g. a lack of characterisation data may preclude an accurate assessment of a waste stream’s categorisation as LLW or ILW). 5.93 The licensee’s decommissioning strategy and plan should identify the types of waste that are expected to be generated and demonstrate that the chosen decontamination and dismantling techniques meet regulatory expectations with respect to the waste management hierarchy [11]. 5.94 The hierarchy encourages adoption of options for managing waste in the order of: - - - - - Prevent waste from arising in the first place Minimise the quantity of waste produced Reuse of those wastes that cannot be prevented Recycling of waste into a form that allows it to be reclaimed Disposal should only occur when waste cannot be prevented, reused or recycled and must be implemented in a manner that is compliant with the environmental legislation 5.95 An essential first step in implementation of the hierarchy is for a licensee to appropriately characterise and then segregate its wastes, to enable optimised waste management through to the point of disposal. The licensee’s system of NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 20 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation characterisation and segregation should enable the wastes arising to be disposed of at the lowest practicable categorisation. This should include exemption and clearance of those decommissioning wastes that have potential to be disposed of as non- radioactive material. Further guidance may be found in IAEA Safety Guide RS-G-1.7 [4]. 5.96 LC32 imposes the duty upon licensees to minimise the total quantity, and rate of production of radioactive waste, so far as is reasonably practicable [3], which is particularly pertinent to decommissioning given the potential to generate large quantities of waste. 5.97 The licensee’s radioactive waste management arrangements should therefore be updated to reflect the changing nature of the radioactive waste being generated, including consideration of appropriate characterisation and segregation to enable optimised management and minimise the volumes of radioactive waste requiring disposal, so far as is reasonably practicable. This may be captured in an Integrated Waste Strategy and/or the Waste Management Plan that is formally required by the environmental regulators. 5.98 The SAPs state that radiological hazards should be reduced systematically and progressively, with radioactive waste generated processed into a passive safe state, as soon as is reasonably practicable (RW.6), and stored in accordance with good engineering practice (RW.5) [1]. 5.99 Information that might be needed for the current and future safe management of radioactive waste should be recorded and preserved (RW.7). This is particularly important for any radioactive wastes generated during decommissioning which do not yet have an available waste route and will therefore be stored for an extended period prior to disposal. The records should capture necessary information to enable the continued safe management of that waste whilst in storage, and also support the future disposability case, as defined in the waste management and decommissioning plans. 5.100 NS-TAST-GD-024 [3] and the joint regulatory guidance The Management of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste on Nuclear Licensed Sites [12] provide further general guidance on management of radioactive waste management. On-site and off-site monitoring (WENRA SRL D-41) 5.101 Licensees normally implement an on- and off-site monitoring programme to demonstrate effective management of its operations and protection the public. This monitoring should include on plant monitoring for the purposes of demonstrating compliance with LC34 (Leakage and escape of radioactive material and radioactive waste), as well as environmental monitoring. 5.102 As a facility transitions into decommissioning, the type of operations conducted on the site and the hazards they pose will naturally differ to those during operations. As such the licensee should review and modify its monitoring programme to ensure it remains appropriate and takes due account of the changes to the facility, any specific hazards arising, and the effluents associated with each phase of decommissioning. 5.103 One key aspect of environmental monitoring relates to land quality management (LQM). Whilst this is an area of regulation which requires joint working with colleagues at the relevant environmental regulator, it should be recognised by the Inspector that ONR has lead responsibility for regulation of radioactively contaminated land on nuclear licensed sites. 5.104 The joint regulatory guidance Regulatory Expectations for Successful Land Quality Management at Nuclear Licensed Sites [18] advocates licensees implement LQM NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 21 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation throughout the lifetime of the facility. However, as a site moves into decommissioning and implements plans to reach its desired end state, LQM will take on greater importance. Further guidance is provided in NS-TAST-GD-083 (Land Quality Management) [3]. Maintenance, Testing and Inspection (WENRA SRLs D-42 – D-44) 5.105 Structures, systems and components should be capable of delivering their required safety function until the associated hazards have been removed or mitigated. There should therefore be adequate consideration of continued maintenance, testing and inspection of SSCs during decommissioning until the SSC is no longer required, as justified within the safety case. 5.106 Maintenance schedules should take into account operational limits and conditions as required in the decommissioning safety case, and re-evaluated in light of operational experience and continuous changes to the plant throughout decommissioning. 5.107 Adequate asset management is required to ensure the facility remains safe and does not degrade to an unacceptable state. Major issues can arise if decommissioning programmes are delayed and as such the maintenance, testing and inspection of SSCs and important assets, which may not necessarily be claimed within the safety case, must therefore address ageing and consider the future decommissioning plan timescales, as appropriate. Inspectors should ensure appropriate consideration of asset management plans should decommissioning programmes be delayed to ensure this does not lead to unacceptable degradation of plant or buildings. 5.108 Inspectors should consider whether the licensee’s plans adequately address the following:          Appropriate baseline characterisation of the assets and the hazards that they protect against. Programmes for the identification, examination, maintenance, testing, surveillance and inspection of SSCs important to safety, which take into account operational limits and conditions. Consideration of ageing, deterioration mechanisms, and obsolescence of SSCs, and the inspection and monitoring of such factors, particularly where decommissioning is expected to take place over long timescales. Periodic review (e.g. inspections or tests) of SSCs to determine whether they are still acceptable. Systems to ensure the prompt repair of SSCs, prioritised to take account of the relative importance to safety of the defective SSC. Systems to ensure the appropriate remedial action following any abnormal event which is significant for the safety of decommissioning activities, including inspection, testing, maintenance and repair of SSCs, as appropriate. Arrangements to review, as necessary, the examination and maintenance and testing program, to take account of the rapid changes to the facility during decommissioning. Similar arrangements to those listed above for any key building structures, services or other systems which are not designated as SSCs but do perform important functions. In taking account of the above factors, plans should adequately address any risks to workers arising from access to buildings, facilities, and structures. 5.109 Further general guidance on expectations relating to maintenance is contained in NS- TAST-GD-009 (Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing of Items Important to Safety) and NS-TAST-GD-098 (Asset Management) [3]. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 22 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation Control of decommissioning activities (WENRA SRLs D-45 – D-47) 5.110 Licensees are required to control activities it undertakes during decommissioning that may impact upon safety through use of suitable processes and procedures approved by the licensee as part of its management system. Given the dynamic state of a facility during decommissioning, the licensee should review and update its processes and procedures used during operations, as necessary, to ensure they remain adequate and applicable to decommissioning activities. 5.111 The arrangements should ensure that no decommissioning activity is undertaken without a prior assessment of its impact on safety, taking into account the postulated initiating events with internal causes included in the safety case for decommissioning. Such arrangements should give due consideration to different decommissioning activities executed in parallel, which might adversely affect safety of each other. 5.112 Modifications, to the plant and of planned decommissioning activities, should be controlled by the licensee, as per its LC22 arrangements, according to the safety significance through application of an adequate categorisation scheme; ensuring appropriate focus is retained on those activities which may have a significant impact upon safety. The LC22 arrangements should also take into account the cumulative effects of changes to procedures, modifications to the facility and the decommissioning organisation, technical developments, decommissioning experience accumulated and ageing of safety systems and components, to ensure there is no overall degradation in safety standards. 5.113 As facilities are decommissioned and redundant safety systems removed, there may be increased reliance on administrative controls over engineered controls. Where this is the case, the inspector should consider whether the licensee has adequately considered human factors when determining the appropriate controls. The inspector may also deem it necessary to seek specific assessment by a Human Factors specialist, depending upon the significance of any change. Further guidance is available in NS-TAST-GD-058 (Human Factors Integration) and NS-TAST-GD-063 (Human Reliability Analysis) [3]. 5.114 Additional Human Factors specialist support may be relevant where the licensee intends to deploy new equipment during decommissioning, to ensure its design appropriately considers the human-machine interface. Further guidance is available in NS-TAST-GD-059 (Human Machine Interface) [3]. Period of Deferment (WENRA SRLs D-48 – D-49) 5.115 In the UK, care and maintenance (C&M) refers to a specific period of planned quiescence on the site or in the facility between decommissioning phases, usually after POCO or de-planting with deferred dismantling and final site clearance. 5.116 During the C&M period the facility should be maintained in a passively safe configuration, so far as it is reasonably practicable, minimising the need for active safety systems, monitoring, and human intervention. This approach may necessitate removal or downgrading of existing SSCs associated with operations, where appropriate, if justified by an update of the safety case. 5.117 If the licensee proposes a prolonged deferral strategy then the C&M requirements should be developed, prior to the deferral commencing. These should be justified within a C&M programme that ensures continued safety of the facility, and this programme should ensure the ability to decommission the facility safely in the future. 5.118 When assessing the adequacy of the C&M arrangements inspectors should consider whether the licensee has adequately: NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 23 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation    minimised, so as far as reasonably practicable, the hazards presented by the radiological inventory prior to entering the C&M phase; addressed ageing, deterioration and obsolescence for safety systems that will be required to remain operational, including potential for upgrade or replacement and that this is included within the plan; and specified the maintenance and examination regime. 5.119 The licensee should record clear decisions regarding whether a period of C&M is appropriate, taking account of the status of the facility, the decommissioning strategy, timescales, etc. Inspectors should expect a robust safety case that takes account of long-term safety as opposed to just renewing the short-term safety case underpinning such decisions. 5.120 The Licensee should demonstrate that they can ensure long-term safety by ensuring and monitoring a safe plant configuration and maintaining an appropriate organisation, supporting infrastructure and corporate memory. The safety case should define a limit to the period of proposed deferment. 5.121 The safety case should justify and demonstrate safety for the proposed period of deferral. The Inspector may choose to assess whether the following is adequately considered in the safety case:      any cliff-edge effects, e.g. those associated with infrastructure availability, degradation of the structures or obsolescence of systems; the effects of deferral should not impact upon the ability to conduct future decommissioning in a safe way where risks are ALARP; the whole lifecycle radiation doses associated with C&M and decommissioning should be ALARP; interdependences of different facilities on a site; and knowledge management and retention of necessary skills and expertise. 5.122 Notwithstanding a justified period of deferral, licensees should adopt decommissioning programmes which are sufficiently flexible to facilitate acceleration of the programme, should this be necessary for safety reasons. SAFETY VERIFICATION Contents, review and update of the safety case for decommissioning (WENRA SRLs D-50 – D-56) 5.123 Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-051 (The purpose, scope and content of nuclear safety cases) [3] for general guidance on safety cases. The following provides additional guidance to inspectors regarding the assessment of safety cases for the decommissioning of facilities on nuclear licensed sites. 5.124 A decommissioning safety case should demonstrate how the licensee will manage short-term risks and achieve longer-term risk reduction over the full term of the decommissioning programme. The safety case should include assessment of any planned new installations, facilities or systems to necessary to support the decommissioning programme, and include the final decommissioning of such infrastructure itself. 5.125 Specific radiological hazards that are of particular importance in the case of decommissioning include, for example, cutting of activated and contaminated material, modification of safety barriers, entry into areas of the plant that were previously inaccessible, decontamination of large items, dispersion of contamination during demolition. This is not an exhaustive nor exclusive list, and licensees should NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 24 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation demonstrate that its hazard identification process has adequately considered all relevant hazards and fault conditions. 5.126 The safety case should incorporate learning from experience of operating the facility, as well as learning from relevant decommissioning projects elsewhere, whether in the UK or internationally. 5.127 During decommissioning, the risks associated with conventional health and safety hazards arising from de-planting and demolition activities (eg asbestos, confined spaces), will inevitably increase. As such, the safety case should adequately consider the appropriate management of conventional health and safety risks where these have the potential to impact upon nuclear safety. 5.128 The safety case should be appropriately underpinned by knowledge of the risk and balanced assessment of associated uncertainties, particularly in the case of legacy facilities. This should be supported by the examination of records and conducting of surveys and measurements to verify the inventory and locations of radioactive, fissile or other hazardous materials in the facility, and the surrounding potentially affected areas. 5.129 Where the licensee identifies additional research is required to underpin its decommissioning proposals, or to mitigate uncertainties, this should be recognised in the safety case, and appropriate plans put in place to deliver the necessary work. 5.130 Inspectors should consider the licensee’s arrangements to maintain the safety case(s) when significant changes occur, according to the safety relevance of such changes and licensee’s categorisation. These might include modifications to the facility, plan or decommissioning practice at major steps in the decommissioning project, or new relevant regulatory requirements. 5.131 Licensees should periodically review the safety case to confirm the decommissioning activities and states are, and will continue to be in accordance with regulatory expectations and legal requirements. Such reviews should also identify and evaluate the safety significance of any deviations from applicable current safety standards and relevant good practice, and ensure an adequate plan to address such deviations are implemented. 5.132 The review should also take into account the cumulative effects of, for example, changes to procedures, modifications to the facility or the decommissioning organisation, and ageing of safety systems and components. Additionally, the review should consider technical developments and decommissioning experience accumulated to update the safety case accordingly. 5.133 In determining the frequency of reviews, the licensee should consider aligning periodic reviews with any major changes in the facility or hazard(s) which may arise well before an otherwise planned periodic review, notwithstanding the general expectation that the interval between periodic safety reviews (PSR) should not exceed 10 years. General guidance on PSRs is provided in NS-TAST-GD-050 (Periodic safety reviews) [3]. Decommissioning reporting and Licence termination conditions (WENRA SRLs D-57 – D-62) 5.134 The decommissioning plan and associated programme(s) should include sufficient short and long term milestones and deliverables to enable progress to be monitored. These milestones will usually coincide with major step changes hazard profile of the site, as associated with the transition from one stage of decommissioning to the next. The licensee should develop suitable metrics to facilitate monitoring and reporting against the identified decommissioning milestones. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 25 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.135 ONR may specify that the licensee may not move from one stage to the next without the consent of ONR (LC35). Examples may include transition into a period of care & maintenance, or commencement of final dismantling and demolition. 5.136 The licensee should identify those records to be available after the completion of decommissioning, how they will be kept and the necessary retention period. This can be done either by the licensee or under quality controlled arrangements for the information to be kept by a third party, eg at the Nucleus Archive in Caithness. 5.137 ONR’s publication Licensing Nuclear Installations [19] explains the circumstances in which a nuclear site licence may be revoked by ONR or surrendered by the licensee. However a licensee’s “period of responsibility” can only end when:    a new licence has been granted for the site the site is used by the Crown and does not require a licence, or ONR has given written notice that in its opinion there has ceased to be any danger from ionising radiations from anything on the site. 5.138 Before issuing such a notice, ONR will assess whether the site has been decommissioned to the point where the remaining risks satisfy the “no danger” criterion derived from sections 3(12)(b) and 5(15)(a) of NIA65. Consideration of a licensee’s case for demonstrating “no danger” should be carried out against ONR’s dedicated guidance [20]. Until such time as the licensee can provide an adequate demonstration of compliance with the “no danger” criterion, it will retain responsibility for safety on the site. 5.139 As decommissioning progresses towards its final stages and the nuclear hazard is progressively reduced, the hazard profile will tend to change towards conventional safety and environmental protections issues. The continued application of the nuclear licensing regime to these final stages of decommissioning was subject to a government consultation on alternative approaches [21]. 5.140 The UK Government is seeking to amend the regulatory framework that applies to the final stages of nuclear site decommissioning to by adopting the 2014 Paris Convention Decommissioning Exclusion [22]. Under this Exclusion, the nuclear liability regime will cease to apply for nuclear sites that meet the qualifying criteria; third party damage or injury will then be covered by ordinary law third party liability. 5.141 ONR will continue to provide effective and proportionate regulation of the delicensing of nuclear sites through amendment of the delicensing criteria, should the Exclusion be adopted into UK legislation. NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 26 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation REFERENCES 6. 1 2 3 Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition Revision 0, November 2014. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/saps Purpose and Scope of Permissioning, NS-PER-GD-014 Revision 6, November 2016. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/operational/assessment/ns-per-gd- 014.pdf Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_asst_guides on Nuclear Licensed Sites Training and assuring personnel competence Licensee Core Safety and Intelligent Customer Capabilities Periodic Safety Reviews (PSR) The Purpose, Scope and Content of Nuclear Safety Cases Reasonably Practicable) Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing of Items Important to Safety NS-TAST-GD-005 Guidance on the Demonstration of ALARP (As Low As NS-TAST-GD-009 NS-TAST-GD-024 Management of Radioactive Materials and Radioactive Waste NS-TAST-GD-027 NS-TAST-GD-033 Duty Holder Management of Records NS-TAST-GD-038 Radiological Protection NS-TAST-GD-048 Organisational Change NS-TAST-GD-049 NS-TAST-GD-050 NS-TAST-GD-051 NS-TAST-GD-058 Human Factors Integration NS-TAST-GD-059 Human Machine Interface NS-TAST-GD-061 NS-TAST-GD-063 Human Reliability Analysis NS-TAST-GD-065 NS-TAST-GD-079 NS-TAST-GD-080 Challenge Culture, Independent Challenge Capability (including NS-TAST-GD-083 NS-TAST-GD-094 Categorisation of Safety Functions and Classification of NS-TAST-GD-098 an Internal Regulation function) and the Provision of Nuclear Safety Advice Land Quality Management Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline Licensee Design authority Capability Structures and Components Asset Management Staffing Levels and Task Organisation 4 IAEA Safety Standards Series, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. www.iaea.org/resources/safety-standards Fundamental Safety Principles, SF-1. 2006 Decommissioning of facilities, General Safety Requirements (GSR) Part 6. 2014 Safety Assessment for the Decommissioning of Facilities Using Radioactive Material, Safety Guide WS-G-5.2. 2008 Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants, Research Reactors and Other Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities, Specific Safety Guide SSG-47. 2018 Decommissioning of Medical, Industrial and Research Facilities, Specific Safety Guide SSG-49. 2019 Application of the Concepts of Exclusion, Exemption and Clearance, Safety Guide RS-G-1.7. 2004 5 Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association. www.wenra.org Decommissioning Safety Reference Levels, Working Group on Waste and Decommissioning (WGWD), Version 2.1, March 2012. 6 IAEA Safety Glossary NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 27 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 10 Additional Technical Inspection Guides, HOW2, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 7 8 9 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Licence Condition Handbook. February 2017. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/silicon.pdf Work with Ionising Radiation. Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 Approved Code of Practice and Guidance. L121 Second Edition, 2018. Health and Safety Executive. www.hse.gov.uk/pUbns/priced/l121.pdf Agreements with Others, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/agency- agreements-mou.htm Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Environment Agency on matters of mutual interest in England, August 2015 Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Natural Resources Body for Wales on matters of mutual interest in Wales, December 2014. Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on matters of mutual interest in Scotland, January 2019 Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR and EA on matters of mutual interest in England, ONR-INSP-GD-061 Revision 1, March 2018. Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR and SEPA on matters of mutual interest in Scotland, ONR-INSP-GD-062 Revision 1, June 2019. Guidance to support the joint regulatory memorandum of understanding between ONR and NRW on matters of mutual interest in Wales, ONR-INSP-GD-063 Revision 1, June 2019. Basic principles of radioactive waste management. Joint guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. Revision 2, 2015. www.onr.org.uk/wastemanage/basic-principles.pdf The management of higher activity radioactive waste on nuclear licensed sites. Joint guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. Revision 2, 2015. www.onr.org.uk/wastemanage/waste-management-joint-guidance.pdf Nuclear Safety Technical Inspection Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_insp_guides NS-INSP-GD-017 Licence Condition 17: Management Systems Review of Radioactive Waste Management Policy: Final Conclusions. UK Government Cm2919, July 1995 The Decommissioning of the UK Nuclear Industry's Facilities. Amendment to Cm2919. UK Government, and Devolved Administrations. September 2004. Nuclear Safety Technical Inspection Guides, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_insp_guides Approved Code of Practice and Guidance for The Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2019. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/documents/2019/reppir-19-acop-and-guidance.pdf Regulatory Expectations for Successful Land Quality Management at Nuclear Licensed Sites. Joint guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to nuclear licensees. Revision 1, 2014. www.onr.org.uk/documents/2014/land-quality-management.pdf Licensing Nuclear Installations, 4th edition, January 2015. Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/licensing-nuclear-installations.pdf NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 28 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 20 21 22 Delicensing of nuclear sites, Office for Nuclear Regulation. www.onr.org.uk/delicensing.htm Discussion paper on: Regulation of Nuclear Sites in the Final Stages of Decommissioning. Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy. November 2016. Decision and Recommendation of the Steering Committee Concerning the Application of the Paris Convention to Nuclear Installations in the Process of Being Decommissioned, NEA/SUM(2014)2 , 30 October 2014, Nuclear Energy Agency. www.oecd-nea.org/law/decommissioning-exclusion NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 29 of 31 Office for Nuclear Regulation 7. ABBREVIATIONS ACoP Approved Code of Practice ALARP As low as reasonably practicable Best Available Technique Baseline Decommissioning Plan The Construction Design and Management Regulations 2015 Care & Maintenance Environment Agency Nuclear Reactors (Environmental Impact Assessment for Decommissioning) Regulations 1999 Électricité de France Funded Decommissioning Plan General Safety Requirements (IAEA) Health and Safety Executive International Atomic Energy Agency Licence Condition Land Quality Management Ministry of Defence Memorandum of Understanding Nuclear Decommissioning Authority Nuclear Energy Agency Nuclear Liabilities Fund Natural Resources Wales Operational Experience Office for Nuclear Regulation Post Operational Clean Out Periodic Safety Review Quinquennial Review Relevant Good Practice NLFAB Nuclear Liabilities Funding Assurance Board Safety Assessment Principle(s) (ONR) SFAIRP So far as is reasonably practicable Scottish Environment Protection Agency Suitably Qualified and Experienced Personnel Safety Reference Level (WENRA) Structure, System and Component Technical Assessment Guide(s) (ONR) WENRA Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 30 of 31 BAT BDP CDM C&M EA EIADR EDF FDP GSR HSE IAEA LC LQM MOD MoU NDA NEA NLF NRW OPEX ONR POCO PSR QQR RGP SAP SEPA SQEP SRL SSC TAG Office for Nuclear Regulation 8. APPENDICES 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 8.7 APPENDIX 1 – DECOMMISSIONING FUNDING The UK Government expects all nuclear operators should take the steps necessary to ensure that adequate funds are in place to meet their decommissioning liabilities. In practice ONR does not directly scrutinise the financial provisions made by licensees, but provides its view to other organisations who give relevant assurance to the UK Government. In such cases, ONR’s advice is based on an assessment of whether the decommissioning strategy and plan on which the financial provisions are based aligns with UK regulatory expectations. Sites owned by the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) are subject to statutory financial arrangements made in accordance with the Energy Act 2004, which assure the provision of funds by the UK government. In addition to setting out the purposes, constitution, staffing and proceedings of the NDA, the Energy Act 2004 identified ONR as a statutory consultee on NDA’s Strategy. The UK Government established the Nuclear Liabilities Fund (NLF) in 1996 with the key purpose of funding the costs of decommissioning the eight nuclear power stations (7 AGR and 1 PWR) currently operated in the UK by EdF Energy (EdF). The UK Government also agreed to fund decommissioning of the eight power stations to the extent that the liability might exceed the assets of the NLF. In order to draw down on the NLF, EdF must apply to NDA with a demonstration that the intended spend is against a qualifying liability. EdF is also required to submit to NDA a baseline decommissioning plan (BDP), on which NDA seeks ONR’s views. The UK Government further legislated, in the Energy Act 2008, to ensure operators of any proposed new nuclear power stations built in the UK will have secure finance in place to meet the full costs of future decommissioning. Under the Act, any such operator is required to have a Funded Decommissioning Programme (FDP) approved by the Secretary of State in place before construction of its power station begins, and to comply with the FDP thereafter. To ensure the operator makes prudent financial provisions, the FDP is expected to:   Identify all the steps necessary to decommission the power station and manage and dispose of all associated wastes, including spent nuclear fuel Give due recognition to the government’s ‘Base Case’ of key strategic assumptions Financial aspects of FDPs are scrutinised by the dedicated Nuclear Liabilities Funding Assurance Board (NLFAB) and ONR is recognised as a statutory consultee. Therefore ONR would expect to provide advice to the Government on the technical content of an FDP in respect of its alignment with UK regulatory expectations. The government published detailed guidance on the principles that the Secretary of State will expect to see satisfied in a duty holders’ FDP prior to granting an approval: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/70214/guidance-funded-decommissioning-programme-consult.pdf NS-TAST-GD-026 Revision 5 Ref: 2019/144943 Page 31 of 31 ns-tast-gd-057.pdf
 Title of document ONR Guide Design Safety Assurance Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-057 Revision 5 Date Issued: November 2017 Review Date: November 2020 Approved by: Gavin Smith Mechanical Engineering Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 1.1.3.776. (2017/456576) Revision commentary: Minor update to reference the Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017. Updated November 2018. 1. TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE CONDITIONS .................................................................... 3 4. LEGISLATION AND REGULATORY INTEREST ................................................................ 3 5. BMS GUIDANCE ................................................................................................................. 4 6. ADVICE TO ASSESSORS .................................................................................................. 4 7. SUMMARY ........................................................................................................................ 16 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY AND FURTHER READING .................................................................... 16 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 11/17 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 2 Page 1 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This technical assessment guide is one of these guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) discusses ONR’s approach to the assessment of design arrangements and processes for nuclear facilities, and how safety is integrated into the design production process. In particular, the design arrangements should demonstrate how integration with procurement, site construction/installation and final commissioning is achieved, leading into operations and associated maintenance and inspection, as well as the safety case development process. This TAG does not specifically address a single Licence Condition or group of Safety Assessment Principles, but concerns an area of activity which is of regulatory interest. It should be noted that the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) makes specific reference to design as an activity which may be subject to licence conditions. Licence Condition 14 requires that the licensee “shall make and implement adequate arrangements for the production and assessment of safety cases consisting of documentation to justify safety during the design, construction, manufacture, commissioning, operation and decommissioning phases of the installation.” Licence Condition 19 requires that “Where the licensee proposes to construct or install any new plant which may affect safety the licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to control the construction or installation.” Licence Condition 20 requires that “The licensee shall ensure that no modification to the design which may affect safety is made to any plant during the period of construction except in accordance with adequate arrangements made and implemented by the licensee for that purpose.” Licence Condition 21 requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements for the commissioning of any plant or process which may affect safety.” Licence Condition 22 requires that “The licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to control any modification or experiment carried out on any part of the existing plant or processes which may affect safety.” This TAG contains general guidance to advise and inform ONR Inspectors in the exercise of their professional regulatory judgement. This document is not intended to provide detailed guidance on the design process for nuclear facilities, but is produced to highlight certain key areas for consideration as part of an assessment process. It is therefore essential that comprehensive reference is made to the ONRs Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) for Nuclear Facilities and other TAGs when assessing such design arrangements and processes. References to the ONR SAPs and the WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels are included in the text of this document. 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 2.10 Comments on this guide, and suggestions for future revisions, should be recorded on the appropriate registry file. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 2 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3. 3.1 4. 4.1 4.2 RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE CONDITIONS The following licence conditions have relevance in terms of design safety assurance:  LC6 Documents, Records, Authorities and Certificates  LC12 Duly Authorised and other Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons  LC14 Safety Documentation  LC15 Periodic Review  LC17 Quality Assurance  LC19 Construction or Installation of New Plant  LC20 Modification to Design of Plant Under Construction  LC21 Commissioning  LC22 Modification or Experiment on Existing Plant  LC23 Operating Rules  LC24 Operating Instructions  LC25 Operational Records  LC27 Safety Mechanisms, Devices and Circuits  LC28 Examination, Inspection, Maintenance and Testing  LC29 Duty to carry out Tests, Inspections and Examinations  LC34 Leakage and Escape of Radioactive Material and Radioactive Waste  LC35 Decommissioning  LC36 Control of Organisational Change LEGISLATION AND REGULATORY INTEREST The general duties under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 (HSWA) impose statutory requirements as follows: 2 (1) It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all his employees. 3 (1) It shall be the duty of every employer to conduct his undertaking in such a way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that persons not in his employment who may be affected thereby are not thereby exposed to risks to their health or safety. 6 (1) It shall be the duty of any person who designs, manufactures, imports or supplies any article for use at work or any article of fairground equipment – (a) to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed and constructed that it will be safe and without risks to health at all times when it is being set, used, cleaned or maintained by a person at work; In addition, the Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2015 place duties on designers to take due recognition of health and safety in the design process. The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 also make specific reference to engineering controls and design features as the primary means of restricting exposure to ionising radiation. Other regulations under the HSWA also impose duties on designers for specified engineering features. Environmental Legislation, Security Legislation and International Treaties also impose legal duties on designers. It should be recognised that design organisations may not be licensees themselves, but should be under the control of the appropriate licensee; therefore acting as Responsible Designers to the licensee Design Authority, who also acts as an Intelligent Customer (see NS-TAST-GD-079 Licensee Design Authority Capability). Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 3 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Nevertheless, the statutory legislation noted above, plus the licence conditions themselves, provide the ONR with the necessary vires to regulate design activity, through coordination with the licensee. This regulatory interest equally applies to the early stages of the design process, at the optioneering stages. However, a clear balance needs to be struck between the benefits of leverage which can be achieved by early guidance/intervention, and the potential negative, disruptive effects which can occur due to detailed questioning of early concepts. Furthermore, caution is necessary to ensure that an impression that a design has been approved is not given. In particular, the ONR should focus on standards and principles, the visibility of optioneering to demonstrate ALARP plus the adequacy of the design process and associated arrangements. BMS GUIDANCE The assessor needs to be aware of ONR’s expectations more generally for Licensees’ safety cases and how they are produced, which are set out elsewhere within other BMS Guidance documentation. A number of other Technical Assessment Guides will be relevant to the subject of Design Safety Assurance and the assessor should review the latest available information on the BMS. In particular, NS-TAST-GD-079 addresses ONR’s expectations for existing and prospective licensees’ Design Authority capability. It considers the licensee’s approach to:  Identification and implementation of organisational arrangements and core competencies to understand and manage the design of its plant and the safety functions that need to be provided;  The use of contractors as ‘Responsible Designers’ to provide authoritative advice to the Design Authority;  The retention of design knowledge in a form that is practically and easily available to the licensee over the full lifetime of the plant until the plant is decommissioned. In particular, NS-TAST-GD-077 informs regulatory assessment of supply chain arrangements which are particularly important to the supply of items or services significant to nuclear safety designated for use in the UK. It also provides guidance for regulatory inspection during the manufacturing stages. ADVICE TO ASSESSORS Introduction 4.3 4.4 5. 5.1 5.2 5.3 6. 6.1 This guide is concerned with the assessment of arrangements for the production of design for structures, systems and components for nuclear facilities. These arrangements should demonstrate that safety considerations are integral to the design process, and that the formal safety justification as evidenced by the relevant safety case, is fully coordinated with the design activity and should evolve in parallel. 6.2 The purpose of ONR assessment of design safety assurance is to establish whether the design arrangements, including interfaces with procurement and construction/installation, leading into the operations and associated maintenance and Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 4 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.3 6.4 6.5 inspection, are adequate to fulfil the required safety functions, and to establish that the hazards created by such arrangements are both tolerable and ALARP, in compliance with legal requirements. Engineering background All structures, systems and components are specified and designed to provide a required engineering functionality. This functionality will have an influence on safety and so requires an appropriate safety categorisation / classification to be assigned. This categorisation / classification (or grading) will affect the design methods and standards, material selection, procurement process, fabrication and installation inspections as well as maintenance requirements and in service inspections. In any engineering process, the resource available (whether it be in time or budget) relating to required activities such as design is always limited. It is therefore appropriate that such resource is targeted at areas which have the greatest potential for danger. This is the basis for all engineering safety categorisation / classification systems. Design requirements and regulation Design requirements arise generally for the following reasons:  The licensee wishes to design, construct, install and commission a facility on a new site, or within an existing site. Licence conditions 19, 20 and 21 are specifically applicable to this scenario, as well as the requirements for site licensing for new sites.  The licensee wishes to undertake a modification to an existing facility. Licence condition 22 is specifically applicable to this scenario.  The licensee is conducting an assessment of structures, systems and components for a periodic safety review. Licence condition 15 is specifically applicable to this scenario.  The licensee wishes to decommission a facility. Licence condition 35 is specifically applicable to this scenario. Early regulatory involvement in the design process can provide assurance that the necessary arrangements are in place to ensure safety, as well as provide preliminary indications as to whether the final design solution will be satisfactory. For new build it may be a vendor who is responsible for design development and control prior to the appointment of a licensee. Under these circumstances the vendor’s design management process may still be subject to regulatory review, and a regulatory strategy should be developed for this which should take cognisance of the guidance provided in this document. Design process 6.6 The design process can be a complex undertaking, involving parties from different disciplines who contribute to the overall design product. This design process will vary between disciplines, but issues of key importance are listed as follows, with discussion in the subsequent paragraphs:   Design Phases (5.7) Hazard Identification (5.8) Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 5 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation                      Optioneering (5.9) Safety Functional Requirements and Design Parameters (5.10) Design Planning and Organisation (5.11) Design Standards (5.12) Design Verification and Validation (5.13) The Interface with Procurement (5.14) The Interfaces between Design Disciplines (5.15) Information Control and Document Management (5.16) Change Control (5.17) Competency (5.18) The Interface with Construction/Installation (5.19) The Interface with Commissioning (5.20) The Interface with Maintenance and Inspection (5.21) Safety Case Production and Interface (5.22) Design Review (5.23) Design Instructions (5.24) Fault Recording and Corrective Action Systems (5.25) Intelligent Customer and Design Authority (5.26) Human Factors (5.27) Design Quality Assurance (5.28) Design for Decommissioning (5.29) Design phases 6.7 A well structured design process is the starting point for a successful design output. The design process should clearly integrate with the safety case production process. There must be a regular two way interaction with the safety case authors such that the designers recognise the need for risks associated with design solutions to be ALARP, with clear evidence of optioneering. Early input from facility operators and maintenance organisations is also necessary. It is important to recognise the safety significance of elements of the design to determine the rigour of the safety review. It must be recognised that the design process is generally iterative, and the key requirement is that the risk associated with the overall functional solution is ALARP. Attempts to justify individual ‘building blocks’ of the overall design solution to ALARP criteria may not be helpful. The safety case authors need to keep abreast of the developing design solutions and associated detail to ensure that the claims made in the safety case remain valid and accurate. A typical design process and integrated safety justification should proceed as follows:  Inception and initial brief  Feasibility studies and optioneering  Conceptual design → Preliminary Safety Report  Scheme design → Design freeze  Detailed design → Design freeze → Pre Construction Safety Report It is necessary that key research and development outputs are available at an early stage in the process in order to allow the design to evolve in a logical progression. The concept of design freeze is an important control tool in the design process, although it should be recognised that it does not, and should not impose absolute constraints on changes beyond this point. However, any such changes to frozen information should be formally justified and the implications assessed, particularly from a safety perspective, and thoroughly integrated into the modified design if the change is adopted. The degree of rigour required in the assessment of proposed changes and Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 6 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.8 the associated implementation should be commensurate with their associated safety significance. It should be noted in the above description that when the Pre Construction Safety Report is produced, the detailed design would generally be ‘frozen’, making changes difficult from a time and cost perspective. This reinforces the need for early regulatory interest in the design process. It is essential that the regulator is made aware of design changes subsequent to the issue of a licence instrument, as part of the regulatory process. The design process will also integrate into the overall project management process and project sanctioning process. A number of project ‘gates’ may need to be successfully negotiated for the project to proceed, requiring specific design and safety case deliverables. Continuity of design resource may be an issue as a result of this process. The design process should also incorporate features known to promote high reliability within organisational due processes, such as diversity and redundancy. Hazard identification Early hazard identification is an important part of design safety assurance and can utilise many different inductive and deductive techniques that are undertaken at appropriate project design stages. One standard format is a ‘structured brainstorm’ to identify hazards, followed by a risk assessment process to quantify the worst credible consequence and associated likelihood, usually expressed as a frequency for cumulative risk. Consequential risks, after the application of safeguards, are then assessed and determined to be either intolerable, within the ALARP region, or in the broadly acceptable region. It is important that identified safeguards, plus other measures subsequently developed following the hazard identification process are recorded and tracked through to conclusion, to ensure adequate implementation. A hazard schedule, which should be treated as a live document, is generally a good way to achieve this. Fundamentally hazards should be eliminated and reduced by design where practicable, and most benefit in this respect is usually achieved at the early conceptual design stage. It should be recognised however that although beneficial, document based hazard identification studies are limited in that they sometimes fail to recognise complex interactions between structures, systems and components. They should therefore be complemented by other methods of hazard identification such as virtual plant walkdowns, plus actual walkdowns during construction/installation and commissioning. It is important that the hazard identification process provides a high degree of confidence that it can identify all credible postulated initiating events. As the process develops, further risk assessments should be undertaken in an appropriate format to maintain the safety integrity of the design solutions. The SAPs FA series (Fault analysis) and WENRA reference level E (Design Basis Envelope for Existing Reactors) are applicable to Hazard Identification. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 7 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Optioneering 6.9 Optioneering is an essential early part of any design process, in order to ensure and demonstrate that solutions are ALARP. Optioneering is a very common project management technique, but can often focus on issues of cost, functionality and programme without specifically addressing safety. The legal requirement to satisfy the ALARP principle means that options related to safety should be addressed as part of the overall design solution. However, optioneering needs to be controlled from a design management perspective during the later detailed design phases in order that the activity can be focused and moved forward, without each step being excessively challenged in detail. Furthermore, it should be recognised that optioneering at a microscopic level can be counterproductive and may not generally yield the best macroscopic solution, with a practical economy of effort. The SAPs NT series (Numerical targets and legal limits) is applicable to Optioneering. Safety functional requirements and design parameters 6.10 Safety functional requirements are deterministic rules which are generated during the start of the design activity, which are considered necessary to ensure safety by identifying the specific safety requirements associated with structures, systems and components important to safety. These can cascade from high level safety requirements, to a larger number of lower level functional demands on individual structures, systems and components. The design should follow these requirements and update them as necessary as part of the process. These requirements should be confirmed during commissioning and then feed in to the operating rules and instructions as described by licence conditions 23 and 24. Associated with safety functional requirements is the process whereby design parameters are established, to define the design duty of the structures, systems and components under consideration. In addition to categorising / classifying designs in accordance with SAPs, physical parameters should be established to define design duties, such as temperature, load combinations, damage and aging mechanisms, environmental considerations, design life considerations etc. This links to the overall consideration of equipment qualification. The SAPs ECS series (Safety classification and standards) and WENRA reference level G (Safety Classification of Structures, Systems and Components) are applicable to Safety Functional Requirements and Design Parameters. Design Planning and Organisation 6.11 A well structured and resourced delivery plan/programme is a key part of a well executed design process. As such it leads directly to ensuring that safety is incorporated into the design output, by identifying safety process requirements, such as Hazops and safety case integration for example, as well as by facilitating a well organised, coordinated process, without which safety cannot be demonstrated and indeed may not be achieved. This plan should identify key inputs, formal design outputs, interdependencies, timescales plus resource requirements, generally in terms of design effort. The resource considerations should also address internal design skills, internal facilities, external skills and facilities (if consultants are used) plus the overall design organisation. A well structured, up to date and well communicated design organisation, evidenced through an organisation chart is a prerequisite for an effective process. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 8 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Design activities tend to be organised as either dedicated project teams, with personnel mixed from different technical disciplines, or as small project management/engineering groupings drawing on effort from functional teams, organised on a discipline basis. Often organisations operate with a mixture of both characteristics. Functional characteristics can bring significant safety assurance benefits in terms of providing collective functional knowledge, robust verification processes, collective competency and standardisation, but can have the disadvantage of discouraging good communication within the project leading to a ‘silo’ mentality. The design programme should be integrated into the overall project and safety case programmes, with specific links to procurement and construction/installation to ensure an effective overall project is achieved. It is also important that suitable checks are in place for the review and questioning of input information, such that it is not blindly incorporated into the design when it might be erroneous. This contributes to the defence in depth, which is an inherent feature of a highly reliable process. Where design is undertaken at various levels of detail by different organisations, it is important to recognise that the Design Authority resides at the highest level, with overall responsibility for the functionality of the completed design product. It is important that the licensee Design Authority should participate in all interactions between Responsible Designers and the ONR, in order to ensure that the licensee develops and maintains this Design Authority capability. The design facility makes a significant contribution to an effective design process, and support resource in terms of personnel and equipment are important factors. Access to technical information is also very important, including availability of historical information. Overall design resource numbers, as well as continuity, turnover, training and morale are significant issues in terms of design safety assurance. Training is a particularly important issue, and should cover not only introduction to new issues, but refresher training to maintain the ‘conscious competence’ mode of operation. Training should also cover physical appreciation of the designed structures, systems and components, and application within the intended facility. The SAPs MS series (Leadership and management for safety) and WENRA reference level B (Operating Organisation) are applicable to Design Planning and Organisation. Design Standards 6.12 Establishing appropriate technical standards to underpin the design process is an essential early activity, which clearly has significant safety implications. A range of standards exists for nuclear design application, including IAEA standards, International, European and British standards as well as in house developed standards, (some with accepted general application with the UK nuclear industry). It is important that the design organisations have an up to date knowledge of the range of available standards, and are able to demonstrate a mature selection process for the specific design application. Selected standards must be effectively communicated within the design organisation, with training requirements identified and implemented as necessary. Changes to standards must also be effectively assessed, communicated and implemented, (although a design standards freeze may also be put in place). The SAPs ECS series (Safety classification and standards) and WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) are applicable to Design Standards. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 9 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Design verification and validation 6.13 Design verification is the process whereby each stage of the design is confirmed as correct against the requirements from the previous stage. This generally entails a process of checking and approval. Two standard checking methods are usually applied, either a direct check of the calculation or design method, following the original philosophy, or alternatively a check by a parallel method or calculation. Generally the parallel method provides for a higher level of assurance, preventing a purely arithmetical check being undertaken for example, on what may be an erroneous philosophy. However, a parallel check does not check intermediate results in detail and so caution must be applied if these values are subsequently used. A complementary method of verification is by comparison with existing, proven design, although if this is used as the sole method of verification then the process must be extremely rigorous. The assurance of design verification can be categorised by assigning a checking category level, ranging from checks within the originating design teams, to independent checks undertaken by external organisations. The hierarchy of verification is generally undertaken in a three tier structure, with an originator, checker and approver. The function of the approver from a verification perspective is to confirm there are no obvious errors, to ensure that the design output is consistent with other design elements, and to confirm the competency of the originator and checker and that the correct level of checking has been applied. Further tiers in the verification process can be counterproductive in diluting the level of individual responsibility and ownership. Notwithstanding the above, a culture of self verification, i.e. ‘checking your own work’, is evident in the most effective design organisations. Design validation ensures that the overall intent of the design is achieved, and prevents failure of this objective by incremental deviation or dilution. This is achieved by a combination of independent technical assessment, peer review, design review, staged testing and commissioning plus operating trials. Where software applications are used in the design process, rigorous software validation requirements must be in force, including for well structured version control. Design packages can be bought in externally or developed internally, using a range of software platforms, but the fundamental validation requirements are unchanged. Where commercial design software is used, it may be appropriate to run separate design codes as a form of validation. Challenges to the safety assurance of the design process can readily evolve from the uncontrolled growth and use of small, bespoke software routines, which have not been formally validated or controlled. Software should only be used for analyses within the bounds of its specified application and associated validation, and the results subjected to sanity checks by simplified calculations as necessary. The interface with procurement 6.14 The interface with procurement is key to ensuring that the delivered structures, systems and components match the design intent. This requires robust systems for identifying products and materials in the first instance, and inspection systems to ensure that the material specified is correctly delivered by the supplier (see NS-TAST- GD-077 Procurement of Nuclear Safety Related Items or Services). Inspection systems are also required to verify the engineering functionality and can include type tests, batch sample tests plus routine tests (including proof tests). Tests can be undertaken at the factory (Factory Acceptance Tests, FATs) and on site (Site Acceptance Tests, SATs), as well as suitable tests on civil structures during the construction phases (e.g. concrete cube tests). Tests may be destructive or non Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 10 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation destructive, and samples from the destructive process should be fully destroyed to prevent inadvertent re-use. It is very important that such tests are well designed such that they mimic as closely as practicable the duties imposed on the structures, systems and components on which the design has been based, and meet specified standards as necessary. It should also be noted that there is considerable scope for misunderstanding regarding terminology associated with testing, and the specifications and arrangements for testing should be given a commensurate degree of technical effort to prevent this, in addition to quality assurance requirements. Arrangements are also required to ensure that non conformances in respect of equipment and materials are adequately assessed and sentenced as appropriate. These arrangements should ensure that the potential non conformance is adequately recognised, categorised in terms of its safety significance, assessed at the correct level of technical competence and the resulting sentencing adequately implemented. The aggregate of a series of non conformances should also be captured within the process, both as evidence of potential systemic process problems, as well as identifying the cumulative effect on safety. The SAPs EQU series (Equipment qualification) and WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) are applicable to the Interface with Procurement. The interfaces between design disciplines 6.15 The interfaces between design disciplines are important from a safety perspective, specifically where design covers multidisciplinary areas. Some form of interdisciplinary check would be a firm expectation as part of any design process. Furthermore, in addition to processes to control detailed interfaces, it is important that suitably competent engineers have an overview of the whole designed system to ensure key issues are not missed. Information control and document management 6.16 Information control, configuration control and document management are critical requirements where large numbers of design documents are produced as part of the process. Licence condition 17 requires adequate arrangements to be made in respect of Quality Assurance, QA. Licence condition 6 also requires adequate records to be made in respect of compliance to any licence condition. Documentation, whether in hard copy or electronic format is the fundamental output of any design process and a significant effort is required to ensure that such information is clear, comprehensive and unambiguous. The following issues are relevant to this subject from a safety perspective:  Document identification  Version control  Presentation format including use of colours  Projection methods and orientation  Terminology  Symbols  Distribution  Retention and availability of access to lifetime records  Production of ‘as fitted/as built’ records WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to the issue of Information Control and Document Management. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 11 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Change control 6.17 The management of change is a key part of the design process, from the early stages when the process may still be highly iterative, to the later stages where the volume of design information may be substantial. An understanding of the way in which the design information is structured or configured is also important in recognising the practical way that agreed changes should be implemented through the design system. The general principles of design change control and associated configuration management are as follows:  Recognition of change  Understanding the safety impact of change  Agreement of change at the correct authority level  Controlled implementation and communication of change  Update of necessary documentation As the design matures, agreement and authorisation of change is generally undertaken at more senior levels within the organisation. Once the procurement and construction cycles have commenced, the impact of potential changes from the design process are greatly magnified, as are the difficulties in correctly implementing such changes that are agreed. However, a mindset which automatically resists change due to its inherent difficulty will have a negative effect on safety assurance by the possibility of failing to recognise and sentence changes which are required. The potential impact on safety can be substantial due to incorrect management of changes, which are consequently inadequately conceived and/or executed. Competency 6.18 Licence condition 12 requires that only Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons, (SQEPs), should perform any duties that may affect safety. This requirement also affects designers and so the design resource should be subject to a competency management system. This system should recognise the skills, technical discipline and experience of the designers and design management should ensure that activities are only undertaken by suitably qualified and experienced personnel. WENRA reference level B (Operating Organisation) is applicable to the issue of Competency. The interface with construction/installation 6.19 The design process should clearly link to the construction/installation process, such that adequate information is provided to the construction teams, and a process should be established whereby queries raised by these teams can be fed back and assessed by the designers. The use of field engineers with design office experience is recommended to fulfil this interface function. Recognition of changes requiring design review is fundamental. Licence conditions 19 and 20 have particular relevance to this issue. Arrangements are necessary in this area to ensure that non conformances are recognised, assessed at the correct level and duly sentenced by a controlled process. The interface with commissioning 6.20 The design process should also link to the commissioning process, such that adequate information is provided to the commissioning teams, and a process should be established whereby queries raised by these teams can be fed back and assessed by the designers. The use of commissioning engineers with design office experience is recommended to fulfil this interface function, with suitable input from future operators Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 12 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation as part of the process. Recognition of changes requiring design review is fundamental. Licence condition 21 has particular relevance to this issue. Arrangements are necessary in this area to ensure that non conformances are recognised, assessed at the correct level and duly sentenced by a controlled process. The commissioning process should confirm the assumptions made and requirements identified through the design process. The SAPs ECM series (Commissioning) is applicable to the Interface with Commissioning. The Interface with Maintenance and Inspection 6.21 The design process should identify the requirements for examination, inspection, maintenance and testing of structures, systems and components as necessary to assure their continued safe operation. Due regard should be made during the design process to visibility and accessibility of structures, systems and components to meet this requirement. Specific attention should also be paid to facilitate the replacement of items which are intended to be renewed within the design life of the overall facility. Licence condition 28 has particular relevance to this issue. The SAPs EMT series (Maintenance, inspection and testing) and WENRA reference level K (Maintenance, In-service inspection and Functional Testing) are applicable to the Interface with Maintenance and Inspection. Safety case production and interface 6.22 The design process must lead to production of safety documentation that achieves the necessary level of assurance and reference should be made to the relevant BMS guidance. Generally the safety case format should follow the claim, evidence, argument logical justification chain, whereby the design process should seek to primarily provide evidence in terms of design information and parameters. Where existing facilities are subject to upgrade programmes, then establishing a firm understanding of the present state of the facility and original design intent is an important input into the design and safety case production activities. Where this information is not readily available, this can be achieved as part of formalised engineering substantiation processes. The SAPs SC series (Safety cases) and WENRA reference level N (Contents and updating of Safety Analysis Report) are applicable to Safety Case Production and Interface. Design review 6.23 Design review is a core requirement of any quality management system. At suitable planned stages, formal reviews should be undertaken to confirm the validity of the design, to act as a forum for information transfer and to identify problem areas and to give direction to solutions. It is important that such reviews are given a high level of support and importance, with participation from procurement and construction/installation disciplines where practicable. Typically a design review should ensure the following:  The requirements of the brief have been identified and are being met  Appropriate design acceptance criteria have been established and are being met Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 13 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation  The safety justification process is integrated into the design process  Correct design parameters have been established  The design identifies appropriate materials and products  Appropriate and referenced design documentation is being produced  The design identifies suitable limits and conditions of operation and safety Design instructions 6.24 Formal procedures should be in place to ensure that design instructions, including those issued to installation teams which are not captured by other suitable documents, are put in place. Such instructions are often generated from the need for direction in advance of formal incorporation into other design generated documentation. Nevertheless, these instructions should be formally generated, verified as appropriate and adequately controlled and distributed. It would be expected that they be incorporated into other formal documentation at an appropriate stage. Fault Recording and Corrective Action Systems 6.25 Formal processes should be in place to ensure that design associated faults and potential improvements identified from procurement, construction, installation, commissioning plus final operation and maintenance are fed back to the designers for consideration. This process is sometimes termed a Fault Recording and Corrective Action System. This consideration should generally follow the following model:  Record and understand the fault  Identify what action is required for existing designs/materials/installations on the project  Identify what action is required for future designs/materials/installations on the project  Identify what changes to design processes may be necessary for the future in general From an overall perspective, ‘lessons learned’ workshops can provide a valuable learning format to ensure that difficulties are minimised for the future. These workshops should also identify positive features, as well as areas for improvement, to ensure that good practice is repeated in the future. WENRA reference level J (System for Investigation of Events and Operational Experience Feedback) is applicable to the issue of Fault Recording and Corrective Action Systems. Intelligent Customer and Design Authority 6.26 The design knowledge should be retained in a form that is practically retrievable and understandable for the lifetime of the facility’s operational and decommissioning periods. The licensee Design Authority responsibility includes maintaining the necessary engineering skills and knowledge, implementation of appropriate research, and dealing with intellectual property issues as necessary. Where design is contracted out, it is important that the licensee retains the role of Design Authority, including Intelligent Customer capability, so as to correctly specify the design requirements, monitor the design delivery process and validate the output. Retention of corporate knowledge is closely associated with this issue. This role of Design Authority and Intelligent Customer capability extends to the review of third party design consultants where they are used by the non licensee design house (Responsible Designer), as well as the interfaces with procurement and construction/installation. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 14 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Reference should be made to NS-TAST-GD-079, which addresses ONR’s expectations for existing and prospective licensees’ Design Authority capability. WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to the issue of Intelligent Customer and Design Authority. Human factors 6.27 Human factors are an important consideration for the design process. The designed structures, systems and components should pay due recognition to human factors in terms of installation, subsequent operation and maintenance. Designers can sometimes create assemblies which only ‘work’ in their final configuration, without due recognition of how they can be safely assembled or maintained. Furthermore, since the mindset is generally one of ensuring that configurations do successfully work, designers sometimes fail to question how they could be misused or fail, in terms of systematically assessing what could go wrong at a detailed level. Human factors input should be made to the design process to ensure that demands on operators to operate the equipment, maintain it and respond to failures are adequately assessed. Physical as well as theoretical models can play an important part in linking the design concepts to human factors issues, in terms of the final configuration. Where necessary, guidance should be sought from specialist human factors practitioners. The SAPs EHF series (Human factors) is applicable to the issue of Human Factors. Design quality assurance 6.28 Design activities must be internally regulated by current and controlled quality assurance procedures which are accessible to all users. These procedures should be enforced by a visible internal auditing regime, with evidence of observations and corrective action requirements as appropriate. As with all quality assurance auditing processes, there should be evidence of effective action and close out of issues to demonstrate a robust process. WENRA reference level C (Quality Management) is applicable to Design Quality Assurance. Design for decommissioning 6.29 Design solutions should take due recognition of the need for future decommissioning of facilities and equipment. This may include the need to replace equipment which becomes life expired, within the overall facility design life, in addition to decommissioning the facility as a whole. It should be recognised that the attributes which may provide straightforward decommissioning may run counter to those which are necessary to ensure safety during the operational lifetime of the facility, e.g. seismic capability may require substantial structural engineering solutions, which are challenging to decommission. Recognition of the future requirement however at the design stage will allow the optimum solution to be achieved, whilst ensuring safety at all stages. Licence condition 35 has specific relevance to this issue. The SAPs DC series (Decommissioning) is applicable to the issue of Design for Decommissioning. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 15 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 7. SUMMARY 7.1 This guidance has been produced to advise the reader of key elements within a design process for items important to safety, primarily for application within the nuclear environment. The detailed features of the design process itself will vary between disciplines and projects, but this document addresses the key elements which should be present in an effective design organisation that produces design solutions that will be demonstrably safe. The elements can be sampled, assessed and inspected to the necessary degree of rigour, as part of the regulatory process, to provide assurance of nuclear safety. 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY AND FURTHER READING 1 Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended). 2 Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. 3 Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007. 4 Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017. 5 Office for Nuclear Regulation – Licence Condition handbook, ONR website. 6 The Tolerability of Risk from Nuclear Power Stations, Revised 1992. 7 Reducing risk, protecting people, HSE’s decision-making process, 2001. 8 Quality management systems – Requirements, BS EN ISO 9001:2008. 9 Quality Assurance for Safety in Nuclear Power Plants and other Nuclear. Installations, Codes and Safety Guides Q1-Q14, Safety Series No 50-C/SG-Q, IAEA, Vienna 2001. 10 Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design Specific Safety Requirements, SSR-2/1, 2012: IAEA Safety Standards Series. 11 Design management systems, BS 7000.     BS 7000-1:2008 Guide to managing innovation BS 7000-2: 2015 Guide to managing the design of manufactured products BS 7000-4: 2013 Guide to managing design in construction BS 7000-10: 2008 Vocabulary of terms used in design management 12 DOE Standard Configuration Management, US Department of Energy website, ref DOE-STD-1073-2003. 13 Maintaining the Design Integrity of Nuclear Installations throughout their Operating Life, INSAG-19, IAEA, 2003. 14 Licensing Nuclear Installations, 4th Edition: January 2015.The Office for Nuclear Regulation. 15 Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition, Office for Nuclear Regulation. 16 WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels for Existing Reactors, Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association, September 2014. Report NS-TAST-GD-057 TRIM Ref: 2017/456576 Page 16 of 16 ns-tast-gd-004.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE Fundamental Principles Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 Date Issued: April 2019 Review Date: April 2022 Approved by: Susan McCready- Shea Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 1.1.3.978. (2019/0101578) Revision commentary: Minor editorial changes made and additional advice to assessors relating to ‘reasonably practicable’ added as part of planned review. Updated April 2019. 1. TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................... 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ............................................................................................... 2 3. RELATION TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ........................... 2 4. RELATION TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ................................................................................................................. 4 5. ADVICE TO ASSESSORS ............................................................................................ 6 6. REFERENCES .............................................................................................................. 8 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 04/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation INTRODUCTION 1. 1.1 2.1 ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This technical assessment guide is one of these guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This Guide gives guidance to ONR inspectors on ONR’s use of its eight fundamental safety assessment principles, in the assessment of licensees’ safety cases, as set out in ONR Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear facilities (SAPs) FP.1-FP.8 [1]. These are high-level principles, and the demonstration that they have been met can be shown by meeting the more detailed SAPs. This Guide does not itself aim to summarise or reproduce material in the Guides relating to the more detailed SAPs, but it indicates the broad intentions of the fundamental principles and some background considerations. Assessors should also take account of the general guidance in the Introduction to SAPs. 2.2 As with all guidance, inspectors should use their discretion in the depth and scope to which they apply this guidance in the exercise of their professional judgement in reaching regulatory decisions. 3. RELATION TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 3.1 Site licence conditions As the Fundamental Principles are overarching principles to be applied throughout the SAPs then the 36 conditions attached to the standard site licence will be relevant. However, seven are of particular relevance to the SAPs covered in this guide. These are: 1. LC 10 (Training), 2. LC 11 (Emergency Arrangements), 3. LC 12 (Duly Authorised and other Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons), 4. LC 14 (Safety Documentation), 5. LC 23 (Operating rules), 6. LC 26 (Control and supervision of Operations), 7. LC 36 (Control and Organizational Change). 3.2 The Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (HSWA) The Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (HSWA) [2] sets out fundamental legal requirements concerning health and safety related to work activities in the UK. HSWA places duties on employers to ensure the health, safety and welfare of their employees (Section 2) and to conduct their operations so that persons not in their employment are not exposed to risks to their health and safety (Section 3). The employer is required to ensure that these duties are met "so far as is reasonably practicable". This principle, abbreviated to SFAIRP, is therefore the basic legal requirement with which employers must comply. ALARP (As Low As Reasonably Practicable) and SFAIRP require the same tests to be applied and are effectively the same thing, though the terms are not interchangeable in legal proceedings which must employ the wording in the legislation. Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 2 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.3 Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 and Approved Code of Practice (ACoP) The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 [3] (IRR17) specify the statutory requirements for the protection of persons against ionising radiation and are supported by an ACoP and guidance [4]. A facility must be designed, operated and decommissioned in compliance with these legal provisions. Aspects of particular relevance to the Fundamental Principles are highlighted in the following regulations and associated ACoP & Guidance in L121.  Reg 8 – Radiation risk assessments – before work is undertaken every employer must carry out a risk assessment to identify the hazards and evaluate the risks to the workforce and to others. It should be noted that regulation 3 of the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999 assessment to be reviewed and kept up-to-date. (MHSWR) [5] requires the risk  Reg. 9 - Restriction of exposure – this requires every employer, in relation to any work with ionising radiation that he undertakes, to take all necessary steps to restrict so far as is reasonably practicable the extent to which his employees and other persons are exposed to ionising radiation. The means of achieving this is the primary objective of the safety submission on radiological protection and all SAPs are relevant to judging the extent to which exposures are restricted by the licensee.  Reg. 13 – Contingency Plans – this requires the employer, where an assessment made in accordance with regulation 8 shows that a radiation accident is reasonably foreseeable, to prepare a contingency plan designed to secure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the restriction of exposure to ionising radiation and the health and safety of persons who may be affected by such accident. Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001 (REPPIR) and its Guide [6]. 3.4 REPPIR 2001establishes a framework for the protection of the public by means of emergency preparedness for radiation accidents with the potential to affect members of the public at premises and during specified transport operations. It also specifies requirements for the provision of information to the public: in advance in situations where a (REPPIR 2001) radiation emergency might arise; and in the event of any kind of radiation emergency (however it may arise). Note that REPPIR 2019 is expected to come into force during 2019. The Energy Act 2013 (TEA13). [7]. 3.5 The Energy Act 2013 (TEA13), http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2012-13/energy.html, which established the Office for Nuclear Regulation and specified its functions, came into force on 1st April 2014. The Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) (NIA) [8] is a Relevant Statutory Provision (RSP) under TEA13. 3.6 The Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) (NIA) [8]. The NIA prohibits the operation of certain facilities unless such facilities are licensed under the terms of the Act. It allows for the attachment of Licence Conditions that may be necessary or desirable in the interests of safety. The standard Nuclear Site Licence has 36 conditions; under TEA13 these are now applicable provisions. The duties in various Licence Conditions to make and implement adequate arrangements are absolute and not qualified by SFAIRP. Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 3 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation Relevant SAPs 4. RELATION TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS 4.1 The SAPs covered by this TAG are FP.1 to FP.8 and the supporting paragraphs 47-52. 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 FP.1, ‘Responsibility for safety’ - The prime responsibility for safety must rest with the person or organisation responsible for the facilities and activities that give rise to radiation risks. This principle reflects the need for there to be a clear responsibility for safety in any workplace. For nuclear installations the main responsibility rests with the licensee, as defined in the Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) (NIA65). It should however be borne in mind that other persons in relation to nuclear licensed sites, tenants or the owners of sites, may have responsibilities for safety under the provisions of HSWA. For facilities not on nuclear licensed sites, it rests with the employer/dutyholder. FP.2, ‘Leadership and management for safety’ - Effective leadership and management for safety must be established and sustained in organisations concerned with, and facilities and activities that give rise to, radiation risks. This principle is further developed in the SAPs section with that title and in corresponding ONR guidance. It follows from FP.1 and recognises the crucial importance of leadership and management, including safety management systems, in achieving and maintaining a safety culture for positive safety outcomes. FP.3, ‘Optimisation of protection’ - Protection must be optimised to provide the highest level of safety that is reasonably practicable. This principle is directly related to the fundamental requirement of HSWA that risks must be controlled and reduced SFAIRP. ‘Protection’ in the present context means measures to reduce the exposure of persons (workers and public) to ionising radiation, from both normal operation of facilities and accidents, including consideration of future generations. The principles in the SAPs are always subject to ALARP considerations. FP.4, ‘Safety assessment’ - Dutyholders must demonstrate effective understanding and control of the hazards posed by a site or facility by means of a comprehensive and systematic approach to safety assessment. This relates to the dutyholder’s processes for the generation of safety cases. These are the means by which dutyholders demonstrate an understanding of the hazards associated with their facilities and the means by which they are to be controlled. The principles for safety cases are developed in the SAPs section on ‘the regulatory assessment of safety cases’. FP.5, ‘Limitation of risk to individuals’ - Measures for controlling radiation risks must ensure that no individual bears an unacceptable risk of harm. This reflects the basic aim of those parts of IRR17 which set statutory limits on the exposure of individuals to ionising radiation. In addition, there are non-statutory limits targeted at limiting the risk to people. See for example SAPs paragraphs 698-700 and 706-709. FP.6, ‘Prevention of accidents’ - All reasonably practicable steps must be taken to prevent and mitigate nuclear or radiation accidents. This is assessed against the SAPs relating to design and operation, and demonstrated in safety cases on system robustness and accident analysis. Many of the SAPs, for example EKP.3 ‘Defence in depth’, are aimed at this objective. Mitigation covers both the on-site response to make safe any plant involved in an accident, and measures taken to protect individuals on and off-site. 4.8 FP.7, ‘Emergency preparedness and response’ - Arrangements must be made for emergency preparedness and response in case of nuclear or radiation incidents. This Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 4 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation relates to the requirements of the Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001 (REPPIR01) for the protection of people on and off-site in the event of an emergency with the potential to give rise to radiation doses above a certain threshold. It also considers responses made under IRR17 regulation 13. 4.9 FP.8, ‘Protection of present and future generations’ - People, present and future, must be adequately protected against radiation risks. This principle recognises that the hazard from radioactivity may be long-lived and widespread. This means that the possible consequences, now and in the future, of current actions have to be taken into account in judging the adequacy of measures taken to control radiation risks. In addition it recognises that there may be risks of genetic detriment to future generations, as well as somatic detriment to exposed individuals. 4.10 Satisfying the fundamental principles is the main aim of all other principles in the SAP. These fundamental principles should therefore be kept in mind when assessing all safety submissions because they establish the overall framework and underlying philosophy for safety that should be used in ONR safety assessment. WENRA safety reference levels 4.11 The objective of the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) is to develop a common approach to nuclear safety in Europe by comparing national approaches to the application of IAEA safety standards. Their Safety Reference Levels (SRL) [9], which are primarily based on the IAEA safety standards, represent good practices in the WENRA member states and also represent a consensus view of the main requirements to be applied to ensure nuclear safety in operating facilities. The SRL are not set at the fundamental principle level, so there is no one-to-one correspondence with them and this guide, however, this guidance is generally consistent with them. IAEA safety standards 4.12 The IAEA Safety Standards, Fundamental Safety Principles, Safety Fundamentals No. SF-1 [10] and supporting documents are relevant to the Fundamental Principles in the SAPs. The objective of SF-1 is to establish the fundamental safety objective, safety principles and concepts that provide the bases for the IAEA’s safety standards and its safety-related programme. Related requirements are established in the General Safety Requirements publications. Guidance on meeting these requirements is provided in the related Safety Guides. 4.13 The IAEA have established 10 safety principles. Of these 7 are relevant to the SAPs Fundamental Principles. The relation between the Fundamental Principles in the SAPs and those in SF-1 are as follows: FP.1 relates to IAEA Principle 1, FP.2 relates to IAEA Principle 3, FP.3 relates to IAEA Principle 5, FP.4 relates to IAEA Principle 5, FP.5 relates to IAEA Principle 6, FP.6 relates to IAEA Principle 8, FP.7 relates to IAEA Principle 9, and FP.8 relates to IAEA Principle 7. 4.14 It should be noted that IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles 2 (legal framework), 4 (justification) and 10 (unregulated radiation risks) are outside the scope of the SAPs. Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 5 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5. ADVICE TO ASSESSORS 5.1 Duties predicated on the ‘reasonably practicable’ test in HSWA and its relevant statutory provisions are open to interpretation by dutyholders and regulators alike. This is because it is a test that is not expressly defined in criminal law but rather a determination made in accordance with relevant case law when proceedings are brought before a court in this matter. In this regard, courts are strongly directed by a legal precedent established in 1949 in “Edwards V. The National Coal Board” which, on appeal, led to the following verdict on the meaning of ‘reasonably practicable’: “Reasonably practicable is a narrower term than ‘physically possible’ and implies that a computation must be made... in which the quantum of risk is placed in one scale and the sacrifice involved in the measures necessary for averting the risk (whether in time, trouble or money) is placed in the other and that, if it be shown that there is a great disproportion between them – the risk being insignificant in relation to the sacrifice – the person upon whom the obligation is imposed discharges the onus which is upon him.” It should be noted that the standard of proof that courts apply in such cases is the civil law test of ‘balance of probability’ rather than the test of ‘beyond all reasonable doubt’ and that the burden of proof rests with the defendant rather than the prosecution. SAPs paragraphs 9-18 give general guidance on the philosophy of ‘reasonably practicable’, which underlies the HSWA phraseology SFAIRP and the effectively equivalent term ALARP. The term As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) is used internationally and is taken to be equivalent to ALARP allowing for social and economic factors. Assessors should be familiar with the SAPs general guidance and the documents referred to therein. Aspects specific to nuclear safety are developed further in NS-TAST-GD-005 supported by; Reducing Risks, Protecting People: HSE’s decision making process (R2P2) [11] and the 6 ALARP guides published on the HSE website. The FPs are drafted as requirements, using the word ‘must’, reflecting their relation to legal requirements. Most of the other SAPs use ‘should’ or similar (exceptions being those SAPs which contain statutory requirements). The use of ‘should’ reflects the flexible nature of health and safety law where ‘reasonably practicable’ takes account of the nature and scale of hazards and risks. This also allows the possibility of different equivalent or better alternatives to the safety provisions indicated in SAPs and guidance. See SAPs Introduction, paragraphs 14-18 and 27-30 regarding ALARP and proportionality. Guidance on FP.1 regarding dutyholder responsibilities is given in the document ‘Licensing Nuclear Installations’. In the application of FP.2, Leadership and management for safety, the assessor should take account of the Principles MS.1 to MS.4 and the guidance given in paragraphs 53- 78 of the SAPs. Additional guidance can be found in the TAG related to Leadership and Management for safety NS-TAST-GD-093 Revision 1 Guidance for undertaking Leadership and Management for Safety Reviews. FP.4 emphasises the need for the dutyholder (i.e. licensee on nuclear licensed sites) to understand the hazards and their control, and to demonstrate such understanding. This includes evidence that the dutyholder is an ‘intelligent customer’ for any information supplied by another party which is relevant to a safety case. Guidance on ‘intelligent customer’ is given in NS-TAST-GD-049 Licensee Core and Intelligent Customer Capabilities. 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 6 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 In order to demonstrate an effective understanding of the hazards of a facility and their control, and thus satisfy FP.4, the safety assessment in the safety case should include both deterministic and probabilistic analyses as complementary approaches to the demonstration of safety. An apparent adherence to the quantitative risk criteria is not sufficient on its own to establish that a situation is acceptably safe. Similarly, cost/benefit analysis may help to support a case, but very careful scrutiny is needed if it is invoked to support non- adherence to well-established good practice. In general, probabilistic and cost/benefit arguments are easier to accept when the variation from current good practice is also evidently safer according to deterministic analysis. The Design Basis Analysis (DBA) would be used to guide the engineering requirements of the design. However, DBA may not be sufficient, on its own, to demonstrate the adequacy of the safety of a facility and should be complemented by suitable and sufficient Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA) and Severe Accident Analysis (SAA) to give a comprehensive demonstration of facility safety performance. Further information can be found in NS-TAST-GD-051 The Purpose, Scope and Content of Nuclear Safety Cases. In meeting FP5, IRR17 provides statutory limits on radiation doses that correspond to the upper limit in the three-zone approach to risk judgements as set out in The tolerability of risks from nuclear power stations (TOR) [12] and R2P2 [11] (see SAPs paragraphs 9-11). FP.3 on ‘Optimisation of protection’ should be applied to reduce potential dose levels below the dose limits and to demonstrate ALARP. The SAPs section on Radiation Protection, and associated guidance, indicate what is expected for such optimisation. In relation to FP.5 and FP.8 it should be noted that off-site doses from authorised disposals of radioactive waste from nuclear sites, including discharges to air and to bodies of water, are regulated by the Environment Agency (England), Natural Resources Wales (Wales) and Scottish Environment Protection Agency (Scotland). Appropriate liaison should be done in accordance with HSE/ONR’s memoranda of understanding with such bodies. 5.10 To satisfy FP.5, limitation of risks to individuals, the SAPs paragraphs 695-758 contain several types of numerical dose and risk criteria, mostly expressed as ‘Basic Safety Levels’ (BSL) and ‘Basic safety Objectives’ (BSO) and presented as Targets rather than Principles. Where the ‘levels’ are IRR17 statutory limits on doses to the workforce and the public they are designated ‘Legal Limits’ (LL). Dose limits and risk targets at the BSL/LL level represent an upper bound that ONR expects a new facility or activity to meet. However, they are insufficient in themselves to ensure the best reasonably practicable protection in any given circumstances. They therefore need to be complemented by optimisation of protection as required by FP.3. Thus both limitation of dose and optimisation of dose below that limit, for normal operations, are necessary to achieve the required level of safety. 5.11 Principle FP.6 addresses both accident prevention and mitigation. Mitigation is regarded as the last level of defence-in-depth, discussed in ‘engineering principles: key principles Defence in depth, EKP.3’ of the SAPs; but it should not be invoked to justify a relaxation or reduced benefit from earlier levels. The safety assessment (FP.4) should include analysis of potential accidents to indicate a basis for the planning of accident management and emergency response (FP.7). 5.12 In respect of FP.7, the assessor is referred to SAPs paragraphs 768ff and principle AM.1 together with its supporting paragraphs. Generally speaking the arrangements required by FP.7 are addressed through various licence conditions, especially LC11. Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 7 of 8 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.13 Relevant to FP.8 are the criteria in SAPs paragraphs 712-758 relating to accidents which includes in paragraph 756, that stochastic health effects from long-term doses should be integrated up to a time of 100 years and be restricted to the UK population. The SAPs on radioactive waste management, decommissioning and land quality management are also relevant to the long-term protection of people. 5.14 The other SAPs are aimed at ensuring that the fundamental principles are satisfied. If it is judged that the totality of SAPs relevant to a particular installation have been met, this should be sufficient to satisfy inspectors that the installation meets the fundamental principles. For example, if a plant is adequately robust (that is, the technical principles are satisfied SFAIRP, so giving suitable and sufficient defence in depth) and if the plant is operated safely (that is, in accordance with the FP.2 requirements plus the site licence requirements) then the ‘accident prevention’ part of FP.6 is deemed to have been satisfied. 6. REFERENCES 1. Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition Revision 0, http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/saps2014.pdf 2. The Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974. 3. The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017, The Stationery Office, 2017. 4. Work with Ionising Radiation, Approved Code of Practice, L121, HSE Books 2018. 5. Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999. 6. A guide to the Radiation (Emergency Preparedness and Public Information) Regulations 2001, L126, ISBN 0 7176 2240 1. 7. The Energy Act 2013 (TEA) 8. The Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended). 9. Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association (WENRA) - Reactor Harmonisation Working Group: Reactor Safety Reference Levels. September 2014 http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2014/09/19/wenra_safety_reference_level_for _existing_reactors_september_2014.pdf and Working Group on Waste and Decommissioning: Waste and Spent Fuel Storage Safety Reference Levels Report, Version 2.2 April 2014 http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2014/05/08/wgwd_storage_report_final.pdf 10. IAEA Safety Standards, Fundamental Safety Principles, Safety Fundamentals No. SF-1. http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1273_web.pdf 11. Reducing risks, protecting people: HSE’s decision making process, HSE Books 2001, ISBN 0 7176 2151 0, Web version. 12. The tolerability of risk from nuclear power stations, The Stationery Office 1992, ISBN 0 11 886368 1 Web version. Report : NS-TAST-GD-004 Revision 7 CM9 Ref: 2019/0101578 Page 8 of 8 ns-tast-gd-005.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE Guidance on the Demonstration of ALARP (As Low As Reasonably Practicable) Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 Date Issued: December 2019 Review Date: December 2022 Approved by: S Turner Principal Inspector, ALARP WG Chair Record Reference: CM9 2019/315236 Revision commentary: This document has been updated to add a new appendix on relevant good practice and correct references to IRRs. 1. TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 2 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 5 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – GENERAL POINTS ............................................................. 6 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – DETAILED REQUIREMENTS ............................................. 8 7. ALARP AND REGULATORY DECISIONS ........................................................................ 18 8. CHECKLIST ....................................................................................................................... 19 9. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 20 10. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 21 11. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 22 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 12/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 2.1 3.1 This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) represents specific guidance for ONR inspectors on what they should expect of a nuclear licensee or dutyholder1 in meeting its legal requirement to reduce risks so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP). The concept of SFAIRP is normally expressed in terms of reducing risks to “As Low As Reasonably Practicable” (ALARP), the terms SFAIRP and ALARP being synonymous in guidance documents. This TAG is part of a sequence of documents, headed by “Reducing Risks, Protecting People” [R2P2] and the series of ALARP Guides for use by health and safety inspectors published on our websites. It is intended that ONR inspectors make use of all these documents when considering licensees' cases or arguments. The requirement for risks to be ALARP is fundamental and applies to all activities within the scope of the Health and Safety at Work (etc) Act 1974 [HSWA]. It is important that inspectors in whatever role are aware of the need to ensure that licensees meet this requirement where it applies. In simple terms it is a requirement to take all measures to reduce risk where doing so is reasonable. In most cases this is not done through an explicit comparison of costs and benefits, but rather by applying established relevant good practice and standards. The development of relevant good practice and standards includes ALARP considerations so in many cases meeting them is sufficient. In other cases, either where standards and relevant good practice are less evident or not fully applicable, the onus is on the licensee to implement measures to the point where the costs of any additional measures (in terms of money, time or trouble – the sacrifice) would be grossly disproportionate to the further risk reduction that would be achieved (the safety benefit). To aid use of this TAG in regulatory activities, a checklist is provided in Annex 1 which references back to the appropriate text in the main body of the TAG. It is recognised that it is unlikely that all of the check points in Annex 1 will apply in any single case – inspectors will need to select those that are appropriate to the specific circumstances. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE The purpose of this Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is to provide advice to ONR inspectors to help them judge whether a licensee has met the requirement to reduce risks to ALARP. As such, the TAG is intended to be used for all ONR regulatory functions relating to nuclear safety falling within the remit of the HSWA. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION HSWA provides the basic legislation for health and safety related to work activities. The HSWA places duties on employers to ensure the health, safety and welfare of their employees (Section 2) and to conduct their operations so that persons not in their employment are not exposed to risks to their health and safety (Section 3). The employer is required to ensure that these duties are met "so far as is reasonably practicable". This principle, abbreviated to SFAIRP, is therefore the basic legal requirement to which an employer needs to conform. ALARP (the term used in HSE/ONR guidance) and SFAIRP require the same tests to be applied and are effectively the same thing, though the terms are not interchangeable in legal proceedings (which must employ the wording in the legislation). 1 Hereafter, in the interests of brevity, “licensee” should be interpreted as meaning licensee or dutyholder as appropriate to the circumstances Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 2 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 The parts of the Nuclear Installations Act we are concerned with became Relevant Statutory Provisions of the Energy Act 2013, rather than HSWA, on 1 April 2014; the impacts of this and related changes do not affect the guidance in this TAG. It is important to recognise that not all the legal duties licensees need to meet are qualified by SFAIRP – so ONR’s ALARP guidance should only be applied where this qualification is in place. For example, the duties in various Licence Conditions, which are now applicable provisions of the Energy Act 2013, to make and implement adequate arrangements are not qualified by SFAIRP. Nevertheless, the demonstration of ALARP will normally be made within the licensee’s safety case required under Licence Condition 23. The need to demonstrate ALARP also arises in other legislation. For instance, specific legal requirements in relation to radiation protection are contained in the Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017 [IRR], which put into UK law the 2013 Basic Safety Standard Directive. IRR Regulation 9 requires that exposure should be restricted SFAIRP. Other relevant legislation is contained in the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999, which requires a suitable and sufficient risk assessment, and in the Control of Major Accident Hazards Regulations 1999 [COMAH]. This TAG is written against the background of R2P2 documents published on the Internet which give guidance to health and safety inspectors on ALARP. This TAG extends the wider guidance to specific aspects of how ONR operates, the use of a licensing regime and other ONR guidance on inspection and assessment. Thus R2P2, the Internet guides (listed below) and this TAG taken together represent ONR guidance to our inspectors on ALARP. [1] and the supporting This document assists in implementing Council Directive 2014/87/Euratom of 8 July 2014 amending Directive 2009/71/Euratom, by highlighting ONR’s regulatory expectations regarding the achievement of nuclear safety and as reference for the timely implementation of reasonably practicable safety improvements (see Articles below) by nuclear site licence holders and, in particular, demonstrating that the IAEA and WENRA Safety Objectives and Reference Levels underpin the UK’s regulatory oversight of nuclear safety (See Section 4 and paragraph 4.6.) Article 8a Nuclear safety objective for nuclear installations 8a (1) Member States shall ensure that the national nuclear safety framework requires that nuclear installations are designed, sited, constructed, commissioned, operated and decommissioned with the objective of preventing accidents and, should an accident occur, mitigating its consequences and avoiding: (a) early radioactive releases that would require off-site emergency measures but with insufficient time to implement them; (b) large radioactive releases that would require protective measures that could not be limited in area or time. 8a (2) Member States shall ensure that the national framework requires that the objective set out in paragraph 1: (a) applies to nuclear installations for which a construction licence is granted for the first time after 14 August 2014; (b) is used as a reference for the timely implementation of reasonably practicable safety improvements to existing nuclear installations, including in the framework of the periodic safety reviews as defined in Article 8c(b). Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 3 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.7 R2P2 sets out HSE's overall framework for decision-making to aid consistency and coherence across the full range of risks falling within the scope of the HSWA. This framework represents our risk management policy and is based on "The Tolerability of Risks from Nuclear Power Stations" (TOR) published in 1992 [2]. TOR defines risks which are so high they are unacceptable unless there are exceptional circumstances, and risks which are so low that they may be considered broadly acceptable so that in most cases it would be disproportionate to apply regulatory time to reduce them further. Between these levels inspectors should consider whether risks have been reduced to ALARP, while recognising that the legal duty for risks to be ALARP is not limited to this range. 3.8 R2P2 explains our decision making process rather than providing guidance to individual dutyholders. The approach is essentially risk-based and R2P2 addresses the qualitative and quantitative role of risk assessment and the key role of good practice in determining control measures. Based on legal precedent, R2P2 considers risk to include the "possibility of danger", though the terminology used in our guidance calls things that present the possibility of danger “a hazard”. 3.9 The HSE ALARP guides published on the Internet (colloquially known as “the ALARP six-pack”) are: 3.10 PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES TO ASSIST HSE IN ITS JUDGEMENTS THAT DUTYHOLDERS HAVE REDUCED RISK AS LOW AS REASONABLY PRACTICABLE [3] This paper defines ALARP and SFAIRP and sets out in plain terms what HSE believes the law requires. 3.11 ASSESSING COMPLIANCE WITH THE LAW IN INDIVIDUAL CASES AND THE USE OF GOOD PRACTICE [4] This paper defines what HSE means by good practice and lists the responsibilities of Operating Directorates (which includes ONR) in respect of identifying and maintaining records of good practice. 3.12 POLICY AND GUIDANCE ON REDUCING RISKS AS LOW AS REASONABLY PRACTICABLE IN DESIGN [5]. This paper recognises the importance of taking account of health and safety in design and sets out HSE's intervention policy with respect to design. At licensed sites, intervention in the design is controlled by licence conditions attached under the powers of the NIA, and is a well established process (see T/AST/051 [25] and Nuclear Site Licensees Notes for Applicants Sites, HSWA Section 6 and the Construction, Design and Management Regulations 2007 [CDM] should be used. [6]). For Authorised 3.13 HSE PRINCIPLES FOR COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS IN SUPPORT OF ALARP DECISIONS [7]. This paper explains the uses and limitations of CBA and is particularly concerned with the correct use of CBA as part of ALARP decisions. 3.14 HSE - RISK MANAGEMENT: ALARP AT A GLANCE [8]. This document summarises many of the key terms and concepts. 3.15 HSE - RISK MANAGEMENT: COST BENEFIT ANALYSIS (CBA) CHECKLIST [9]. This document summarises HSE's view of what should and should not be considered in a dutyholder's CBA for health and safety ALARP determinations. 3.16 NIA provides for ONR to attach Licence Conditions to a site licence in the interests of safety and with respect to the handling, treatment, and disposal of nuclear matter. Licence Condition 14 requires arrangements to "produce and assess safety cases .... to justify safety" and Licence Condition 23 requires an adequate safety case be produced and that the facility is then operated in accordance with that safety case. These safety cases still need to address the duty to reduce risks to ALARP from HSWA. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 4 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.17 Under the IRRs, the licensee has to carry out a risk assessment prior to commencing work with ionising radiation, review progress during the job (for example tracking a dose budget) and consider plant, procedures and training aspects. A prime aim of these prior risk assessments, along with demonstrating legal limits on exposure etc. will be complied with, should be to ensure the risks, particularly those due to expected radiological exposures from the planned activities, will be reduced to ALARP. 3.18 Many decisions on what is needed to meet ALARP for conventional (i.e. non- radiological) safety are made at the time regulations are being written and judgements of acceptability can therefore often be made directly against the requirements of those regulations (although the legal duty to reduce risks SFAIRP still remains). 4. 4.1 4.2 4.3 RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED The SAPs [10] were developed against the background of the legal requirements and the TOR philosophy, and have been benchmarked against the IAEA Safety Standards. They contain engineering and operational principles, safety analysis requirements and numerical targets and legal limits. The need to demonstrate risks are ALARP is an overriding and all-embracing requirement. Paragraph 16 of the SAPs emphasises that "The principles are used in helping to judge whether reducing risks to ALARP is achieved.......”. This has not been stated in each case to avoid excessive repetition". Furthermore it is also a requirement of SAPs that "priority should be given to achieving an overall balance of safety rather than satisfying each principle or making an ALARP judgement against each principle". The expectation from SAPs is that a safety case (see T/AST/051 [25]) should provide an analysis of normal operation, potential faults and accidents, and of the engineering design and operations, and demonstrate the risks from all these perspectives have been reduced to ALARP. The TOR philosophy has been translated into nine Numerical Targets in the form of Basic Safety Levels (BSLs) and Basic Safety Objectives (BSOs) (see SAPs para 695ff). It is however, essential that these are applied against a background of good engineering and operational practice. The BSOs represent broadly acceptable levels below which regulatory resources will generally not be used to seek further improvements, and where assessors should confine themselves to considering the validity of the arguments presented (SAPs para 701). This is a pragmatic approach to enable targeted and proportionate use of our resources; it is not a green light for licensees to forego ALARP considerations at such levels. It is ONR policy that a new facility or activity should at least meet the BSLs (note that in a few cases the BSLs are legal limits derived from IRRs - these are designated as BSL(LL) in SAPs). All the other Targets are policy guidance for inspectors and are not mandatory. Older facilities may have been designed and constructed to different safety standards and deterioration over time now means that BSLs are exceeded. In these cases, provided the BSL is not a legal limit, it may be reasonable for operation to continue if: i) it has been shown that no reasonably practicable options are available to reduce risks further in the short term; and ii) a clear longer-term plan to manage and reduce risks within as short a period as reasonably practicable is in place. 4.4 The criteria for determining whether an explicit ALARP demonstration is required in relation to the Engineering SAPs, which represent ONR's views of relevant good practice, are not set out in numerical terms. Instead, if the relevant SAP is evidently well satisfied, then the facility should be considered to be meeting the equivalent of the TOR broadly acceptable criterion on that particular point and therefore there is unlikely Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 5 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 4.5 4.6 5. 5.1 5.2 to be a need for further assessment against ALARP. Conversely, any non- conformance with relevant good practice should be explicitly highlighted and then justified as reducing risks to ALARP within the safety case. The hierarchy of safety measures set out in the Engineering Key Principles (EKP 1-5 and supporting guidance, particularly SAPs para 155) will usually be a key part of the ALARP analysis. Essentially the SAPs approach is to seek solutions as near to the top of the following list as possible: avoid the hazard; design to achieve fault tolerance; maintain safe conditions by passive means rather than active systems; initiate protection automatically in preference to manually; and mitigate fault consequences. This philosophy is also embodied in para 8 of HSE's ALARP in Design paper [5]. In addition to SAPs, the IAEA Safety Standards and the Safety Reference Levels developed by WENRA for reactors, decommissioning, and the storage of radioactive waste and spent fuel [21] should be considered to be UK relevant good practice. IAEA Safety Standards are developed by international consensus and were used to benchmark the SAPs [10] The WENRA Reference Levels for reactors are much more specific and only apply to existing civil nuclear reactors. However, the decommissioning safety reference levels are relevant good practice for all types of nuclear facilities and cover all stages in the lifecycle. The storage reference levels apply to facilities where radioactive waste or spent fuel is stored for a significant period of time. The UK, as a member of WENRA, has formally signed on to the Reference Levels and, in line with ONR’s enforcement policy [22] in relation to relevant good practice, we expect them to be followed. WENRA’s safety objectives for new nuclear power plants [26] and guidance on timely implementation of reasonably practicable improvements to existing nuclear power plants [27] are also considered to be UK relevant good practice. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – GENERAL POINTS To aid use of this TAG in regulatory activities, a checklist is provided in Annex 1 which references back to the appropriate text in the main body of the TAG. It is recognised that it is unlikely that all of the check points in Annex 1 will apply in any single case – inspectors will need to select those that are appropriate to the specific circumstances. Our current advice [3] is that the essence of a demonstration that risks have been reduced ALARP is to show that the "costs" (sacrifice) of improving safety any further would be grossly disproportionate to the safety benefits that would accrue from implementing any identified improvement compared to the status quo. This does not mean that a detailed analysis is necessary: the emphasis must be on an analysis which is fit for purpose. Neither does it mean that a quantitative argument based on risk estimates is always necessary, as qualitative features such as applying deterministic engineering principles may be sufficient in making a case. However, ONR inspectors should seek suitable and sufficient Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA) in addition to deterministic analysis for systems where there are significant hazards and complexity. Assessing an ALARP demonstration is essentially a consideration of whether an adequate argument has been made that a further reduction in risk would not be feasible at a reasonable cost, given the magnitude of the risk. However where there are several risks which interact, whether arising from a single hazard or from different connected hazards, there may be a need for balancing to achieve the best overall solution. 5.3 Demonstration of ALARP requires the licensee to evaluate the risks and to consider whether it would be reasonably practicable to implement further safety measures beyond the initial proposals or what is currently in place. This ought to include the consideration of a number of options to identify which is the reasonably practicable Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 6 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation option or collection of options that give the best safety benefit, and making this consideration transparent. In reality there may only be a limited number of options for dealing with a particular health and safety issue. However, features such as: good practice that HSE may have accepted as relevant good practice; an option adopted elsewhere in similar circumstances; and the extent to which this option has worked in practice, often provide strong indications of what the ALARP solution might be. 5.4 The following represent principles which are likely to need addressing in most cases: 1 The application of ALARP can only be to risks which the licensee controls (e.g. it is not a requirement for nuclear power plant operators to consider other forms of electrical generation). 2 Affordability, i.e. whether a company is in a position to fund improvements, is not a legitimate factor in the ALARP argument, though the cost of implementing the improvement is. 3 ALARP cannot be used to argue against fulfilling statutory duties. 4 The ALARP argument needs to consider all the types of risk that are relevant, not just the nuclear / radiological ones, and where these conflict with one another, ensure that an appropriate overall balance is achieved in regard to their management. 5 ALARP demonstrations ought to consider all the various options which could realistically improve safety, and then implement the option or combination of options which achieves the lowest level of residual risk provided this is reasonably practicable (para 50 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3]). It is not adequate to start with the cheapest option first. Similarly, inspectors should be alert to disproportionate consideration of ‘deluxe’ options that involve excessive cost being used to argue that there are no reasonably practicable improvements. The timescale for implementation may be a factor in the choice of the ALARP option, so due consideration should be given to less effective options that might be implemented with shorter lead times, especially where the risks are high or the resultant hazard reduction is significant. In more complex situations, licensees will have to select an option taking cognisance of all relevant legislation such as safety, environmental and security. Section 6.6.4 provides guidance on developing an optimised solution where there are both safety and environmental duties to be met. 6 Existing facilities should be compared against relevant modern standards, including those not in force when they were designed / constructed. The safety case should consider the importance of any shortfalls and what options exist for improvement, again starting with the safest, and then consider the reasonable practicability of implementing them. Older facilities may meet the ALARP requirement at higher risks than new ones (para 52 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3]). 7 The ALARP case should be fit for purpose. If the risks are high then the demonstration of ALARP needs to be more rigorous than if the risks are low. The degree of rigour should also depend on the consequence level. For higher consequence situations the consequences should weigh more heavily than the frequency estimates. Furthermore, thought should be given to the robustness of the conclusions with respect to uncertainties and to any assumptions employed in the demonstration. 8 If the ALARP demonstration employs a comparison of costs and risk reduction benefits to rule out an improvement, then based on our current guidance [3], it must be shown that the costs (sacrifice) of the improvement would be "grossly disproportionate" (see Cost Benefit Analysis Principles [7]). The law does not Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 7 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation recognise an acceptable region other than when ALARP has been met so there is unlikely to be any sympathy in the courts for parity of costs and benefits, even at the TOR Broadly Acceptable level. Advice from HSE lawyers is that, provided the risk is more than fanciful, the courts would still seek "gross disproportion". It is also true that, depending on circumstances, future health and safety court cases may lead to a change in interpretation of SFAIRP and subsequently HSE and ONR guidance on this matter. However until such time we will continue to follow our existing guidance. i) There is however, no precise legal factor or HSE algorithm for gross disproportion. For the purposes of this TAG, it is suggested that the evidence given by John Locke, then Director General of HSE, at the Sizewell B Public Inquiry provides a starting point. Although this evidence was produced some time ago, no subsequent legal proceedings or public inquiries have countered these views or provided alternatives. In his evidence, Locke suggested a gross disproportion factor of up to 3 for workers. For risks to the public, he added that the factor would depend on the level of risk, and where the risks were low (consequence and likelihood) a factor of about 2 was suggested, whereas for higher risks the factor should be about 10. ii) The Health Protection Agency (HPA, now Public Health England) produced guidance relating to the dose saved resulting from routine exposure or minor accidents i.e. stochastic effects, up to about 100 mSv. This recommends that an increasing multiplier is used as the dose increases and comparison of licensees submissions with this approach may be valuable as part of our assessments [11]. iii) In view of these precedents, it is suggested that a factor of less than 10 in the vicinity of a BSL is unlikely to be acceptable and, for hazards that can cause large consequences, the factor may need to be larger still. 6. 6.1 ADVICE TO INSPECTORS – DETAILED REQUIREMENTS Relevant Good Practice ALARP demonstrations should consider first and foremost factors relating to engineering, operations and the management of safety. These expectations are often referred to by the general term "relevant good practice". Based on HSE [4], relevant good practice is "… those standards for controlling risk which have been judged and recognised by HSE as satisfying the law when applied to a particular relevant case in an appropriate manner." In nuclear safety applications, where the potential consequences of accidents can be very serious, the best practice identified as appropriate to the application would normally be required for new designs. Annex 2 contains further guidance on the application of ALARP for new civil nuclear reactors in the context of Generic Design Assessment [20]. Annex 3 contains responses to a number of RGP frequently asked questions. 6.2 For an existing facility, relevant good practice is established by using the standards that would be applied to a new design as a benchmark and then subjecting any shortfalls to the test of reasonable practicability. Unless the sacrifice entailed in moving towards the benchmark is grossly disproportionate to the safety benefit, the licensee should make that move. 6.3 What is accepted as relevant good practice may change over time because of technological innovation which improves the degree of control, cost impact of improvements or knowledge about the hazard. For existing facilities in Periodic Safety Reviews (PSRs), the facility should be compared with the benchmark of modern Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 8 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 standards (see T/AST/050 [23] on PSRs for more information). Due account should then be taken when considering compliance and the reasonable practicability of improvements, of aspects such as the age of the facility, its future lifetime, future operations and the degree and importance of any shortfall. In terms of specific sources of relevant good practice for the nuclear industry there are several legal requirements which must be met and in some cases ACoPs (Approved Codes of Practice) and Guidance have been issued (e.g. the ACoP to the IRRs [12]) to assist the licensee in achieving compliance. Standards exist for many engineering and operational features and it is a feature of new designs that licensee proposals may be based on non-UK standards. Such standards should be subject to assessment to ensure they represent appropriate relevant good practice in a UK context. There are also several international bodies which produce standards or guidance documents: where the UK is tied by international agreements, e.g. EU, the standards have the same status as UK ones; where such agreements do not exist, the guidance may be considered as authoritative, but subsidiary to UK requirements. In a nuclear context, IAEA Safety Standards and the Safety Reference Levels developed by WENRA for reactors, decommissioning, and the storage of radioactive waste and spent fuel [21] should be considered to be relevant good practice. ONR inspectors should use the SAPs together with the associated TAGs to judge whether licensees' claims for relevant good practice are justified. As the TAGs are revised they will be updated in line with the SAPs and will also include explicitly the WENRA Reference Levels that are relevant to the TAG in question. Similarly ONR guidance on inspection (TIGs) provides the means by which many day-to-day relevant good practice decisions are made, e.g. in regard to operational safety. Another important source of relevant good practice in the nuclear industry is what is done on similar facilities. Many licensees have established their own standards reflecting good practice that are acceptable to ONR. However in invoking past practice it is important to be clear whether the practice remains relevant and whether it was implemented for safety reasons. In reaching a decision to implement measures to reduce risks, licensees sometimes take into account additional factors that are not directly safety related (e.g. lower insurance premiums, enhanced commercial reputation etc). It is important that inspectors do not take such factors into account when considering whether licensee precedents represent relevant good practice (see para 19 of R2P2 appendix 3). 6.8 In many cases licensees will claim that the implementation of a particular relevant good practice or standards is sufficient to demonstrate ALARP. In assessing such claims inspectors should apply SAPs ECS.3 to ECS.5 and EQU1 (paras 169 to 177) and in particular may consider:   the good practice or standard should be relevant to the specific application, plant, facility or industry in question. the good practice or standard should be up-to-date, taking account of the current state-of-the-art: any practice or standard more than a few years old, or not subject to active ongoing monitoring and review or not written by acknowledged experts may be suspect.  the good practice or standard should not be in the form of a minimum requirement.  where a good practice or standard allows for more than one option, these should be tested to determine those which are reasonably practicable. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 9 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation  the good practice or standard should include explicitly all relevant factors, particularly relating to assumptions on the standards of contingent systems or inputs/outputs. Standards and good practice may relate to single Systems, Structures and Components and further consideration may need to be given to possible interactions.  there should be no doubt about the applicability of the good practice or standard to the case in point. 6.9 Explicit Comparisons Deciding what is reasonably practicable involves the exercise of judgement and enforcing authorities will generally expect relevant good practice to be followed. Where relevant good practice in particular cases is not clearly established, health and safety law effectively requires dutyholders to establish explicitly the significance of the risks to determine what action needs to be taken. Where it is not possible to demonstrate ALARP by good practice features and risk estimates alone, the benefits of risk reducing measures should be compared with their costs. Sometimes it is helpful to use a common unit, which is generally money, so that the analysis may become a form of Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA). The degree of quantification is case dependent, but must be sufficient to make the case fit for purpose. In particular, a CBA is unlikely to be considered an adequate argument on its own that a situation is ALARP [14]. The following paragraphs give further brief guidance on quantitative approaches, on numerical estimation of risks, and on the application of CBA and other quantitative approaches. Further guidance to inspectors is provided in HSE's generic Principles for CBA [7] the CBA Checklist [9]; HSE's policy in regard to CBA is summarised in Appendix 3 of R2P2 [1] and paragraphs 101-108 of its main text. Risk Estimation 6.10 The outline of a quantitative case is relatively straightforward. The benefit requires two estimates of risk: one before the implementation of the improvement and one after. The safety benefit of the improvement is the incremental difference in risk between the two estimates in terms of the detriments (i.e. all the adverse consequences) and their likelihoods, summed over the remaining life of the facility. It is anticipated that a broad comparison of these benefits and the costs of the improvement can in many cases lead to a decision without needing to translate the risk reduction into monetary terms. In other cases the detriments may need to be expressed in terms of money to compare with the costs of the improvement. 6.11 The level of risk without the improvement sets the starting point on the risk scale and so influences the gross disproportion factor (see para 5.4 (8) and [9]). The selection of an appropriate gross disproportion factor will also depend on the robustness of the analysis and so should be one of the parameters varied in sensitivity studies. 6.12 Where a CBA is employed, inspectors should verify that the scope of the CBA is sufficient and comprehensive. In particular, there should be a process of systematic identification and assessment of benefits and detriments, supported by a suitable sensitivity analysis. 6.13 The use of CBA for comparing the sacrifice from making improvements against the safety benefits gained is part of the regulatory process followed during the production of new regulations by HSE and other government departments. Less well developed is the use of CBA in decision making within the type of goal-setting regulation which ONR uses. TOR [2] Appendix 3 considers the application of CBA to nuclear safety assessment and concludes that whilst it may be useful in some circumstances (e.g. where quantification can be obtained without disproportionate effort or excessive Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 10 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation uncertainty), it was not feasible, at the time of writing to develop a CBA "rule book" approach that can be applied mechanistically. Principles for CBA [7] further acknowledges that HSE has no algorithm to determine this factor, which needs to be set on a case-by-case basis. Subsequent regulatory experience (since TOR) suggests there would be little benefit in ONR developing such a “rule book” in view of the types of safety case arguments we normally see and the overriding need for licensees to consider relevant good practice as the starting point for their risk assessments. Cost screening can be a useful aid to help decide if more needs to be done; justified risk estimates are used together with reasonable accident cost estimates, to provide an indication of the amount worth spending to remove the risk. If this amount is low, even taking account of potential uncertainties and gross disproportion, compared with the cost of any realistic risk reduction measures, then it can be a useful indicator that no further risk reduction is needed. 6.14 In calculating the accident risk it is important that all the changes in risks due to the potential modification are accounted for (see also para 17 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3]). It is important to be sure that licensees do not understate the value of the benefit from the improvement by limiting the analysis to only the most severe of risks. Assessors should therefore check that licensees have not masked potential improvements which would affect non-dominant risks by considering only changes to the overall risk: all possible risk reductions should be viewed on their own merits. 6.15 Some quantitative arguments may involve balancing risks, for example implementation of a modification to reduce risk to the public might lead to a dose uptake during the work, and hence a transfer of risk. Although TOR [2] gives the tolerable individual risk to a worker as ten times higher than that to the general public, this should not be interpreted to imply that risks to different groups should be valued differently for ALARP purposes (see paras 37 & 38 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3]). The issue of balancing risks may also need to involve cooperation with other agencies (e.g. the Environment Agency & Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA)) if some of the risks are associated with authorised discharges, protecting the environment or disposal of radioactive waste. The Environment Agency employs the concept of “Best Available Techniques” (BAT) to establish the appropriate levels of protection and SEPA use “Best Practical Means” BPM. In reality BAT and BPM require dutyholders to follow a very similar process of balancing to that used in ALARP determinations. This is discussed further in para 6.36. Valuation of Detriments 6.16 Valuation of detriments is still a subject of much discussion and research. HSE uses a figure [9] of £1.5million (2009) for the Value of Preventing a statistical Fatality (VPsF). In the case of death caused by cancer, HSE has taken the view that people are prepared to pay a premium and R2P2 says that a higher figure, twice the above should be used. It is suggested here that this premium is also appropriate for all radiation deaths. However, continuing research has questioned the validity of applying a premium, and so it is possible that the premium may be removed at some future date. Noting that in most cases a factor of 2 will not have any material effect on what is / is not reasonably practicable given the uncertainties generally prevalent in CBA, this aspect will not normally be important. However, in the unlikely case that including this factor is the pivotal aspect in determining whether an improvement reduces risks to ALARP, inspectors should seek the advice of the relevant ONR Professional Lead as to the current status of the research into this area. 6.17 Accidental releases of radioactive material may lead to widespread contamination off and within the facility or site. Off-site it will lead to other safety-related detriments such as evacuation, relocation, land interdiction and food bans. Attempts to cost all of these have been made by licensees both for reactors and for chemical plant, based on the HPA (now Public Health England) model COCO-1 [15]. An updated model, COCO-2 Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 11 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation [16], published in 2008, takes account of the current UK economic structure, considers some of the economic effects of an accident in more detail and includes some additional sources of loss. COCO-2 now represents the benchmark when the costing of detriments is part of the ALARP demonstration. Costs of Implementation 6.18 A more difficult area for assessment may well be estimating the costs (sacrifice) of the modification as these may require a knowledge of both the engineering design and the costs of components etc. It is likely that the full engineering details of the modifications will not be available so that accurate costings will be difficult. 6.19 In considering the sacrifice, it is important that only those costs relating to health and safety improvements are included. The costs considered should be only those necessary and sufficient for the purpose of reducing the risk and not be for "deluxe" measures where cheaper "standard" measures are available. 6.20 Of all the cost factors, the loss of revenue is particularly problematic as it can lead to a paradox: If a plant shutdown is required to implement an improvement, a high revenue earning plant may be able to show it is not reasonably practicable to implement an improvement which a lower revenue plant would otherwise have implemented. Nevertheless ONR accepts that shutdown costs constitute a legitimate part of the sacrifice and it is valid to include them. To avoid undue influence of this factor, licensees should have considered the phasing of the implementation. For example, it may be reasonable to delay implementation until a planned or other outage. Furthermore, in some circumstances it may be established relevant good practice to shutdown to enable implementation of the improvement, and in such cases these costs will have already been implicitly accounted for. Where this is the case, a CBA-based argument against implementing established good practice is unlikely to be acceptable. 6.21 Any discounting of costs and benefits into the future should follow standard Treasury rules, with due allowance made for up-rating benefits to take into account predicted future improvement in living standards. For further information relating to the application of discount rates, inspectors are referred to 'The Treasury Green Book' [18], which describes the appraisal and evaluation of Government funded projects. 6.22 When reviewing proposals to reduce the risks posed by an existing facility, there will often be a delay before implementing improvements, for example arising from the need to design/manufacture equipment. This raises questions regarding how to take this intervening period into account. In such cases, the extent of the original shortfall against ALARP should be based on the future life of the facility etc at the time the safety case is made, and not the (shorter) remaining life following implementation. However, the evaluation of the benefits arising from the improvement may take account of the time to implement. In addition, consideration of the risks during the period prior to implementation should apply the Time at Risk guidance discussed below. 6.23 The purpose of this part of the TAG is to consider some of the applications of the ALARP principle which can lead to contentious situations and/or difficult decisions. Difficult Areas Uncertainties 6.24 One of the difficulties in making a robust quantitative argument is that many of the factors, both in determining the sacrifice and safety benefits, are subject to sizeable uncertainties. Hence in making a case, particularly where it uses quantitative methods, sensitivity studies to test the robustness of the arguments should always be provided. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 12 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation Paragraphs 89 to 93 of R2P2 precautionary approach in the face of uncertainty, i.e. assume that precautions should be taken unless there is a good reason to think that the risk is insignificant (see also SAPs para 30). and appendix 1 of R2P2 recommend the use of a Time at Risk Situations 6.25 The Numerical Targets set out in SAPs are (mostly) given as frequencies based on annual averages. Circumstances will arise where a higher risk will exist for shorter periods of time that make the use of annualised frequency targets inappropriate. 6.26 There are three principal situations in which licensees may argue the acceptability of increased risk for a short period to justify not spending resources to improve safety to a level that would be reasonably practicable for continuous, long-term operation: Through Life - Where a short-term increased risk is needed for continued normal operation of the facility. Examples here include undertaking certain maintenance activities, temporary disconnection of safety measures to allow completion of essential tasks or other intermittent activities that are required to sustain production. Residual Facility Life - As a facility ages, its safety margins may be eroded, for example due to ageing effects, or its risks may appear high when compared to newer facilities designed to more modern standards. Licensees may however invoke arguments that these risks are acceptable because the short remaining operating life of the facility means that significant investment is unreasonable. End of Life Legacy – Clean-out and decommissioning may necessitate short periods of increased levels of risk compared to those from previous normal operations. Licensees may argue this is unavoidable if remediation of the facility is to be completed. Through Life Risk – Specific Considerations 6.27 The guidance below is intended to provide an overall policy against which to assess whether a licensee has made an adequate demonstration that all reasonably practicable measures to control any short-term elevated risk have been taken. Due to the large number of possible reasons for elevated short-term risk, judging whether these requirements have been met for a specific situation however needs to be done on a case to case basis: 1. 2. 3. SAPs Principle NT.2 states that there should be sufficient control of radiological hazards at all times. Any period in which the risk is elevated, whatever the situation, must be subject to a specific demonstration that risks are controlled ALARP. The period of this elevated risk should be as short as reasonably practicable (SAPs para 762). In considering NT.2, the demonstration of ‘sufficient control of radiological hazards’ should include explicit consideration of defence-in-depth levels 1 to 4 (SAPs Principle EKP.3), and the hierarchy of such measures (SAPs Principle EKP.5). The short-term risk, when annualised, should not exceed BSLs except in exceptional circumstances. Any case made for carrying out any operation which requires the risk to be in the intolerable region, however briefly, needs to be made very rigorously to show that nothing more can reasonably be done. Such circumstances should be regulated consistent with in SAPs paras 699-700. Exceptional circumstances may include, for instance, situations not originally foreseen the guidance set out Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 13 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 4. 5. 6. in the design of the facility. It is expected that the licensee will put arrangements in place to prevent a recurrence of the unforeseen situation. The extent of the time for which the risk is increased should not be the sole argument for acceptability that a situation reduces risks to ALARP. The safety case should, drawing from appropriate relevant good practice, consider whether or not additional measures are necessary. As in any consideration of ALARP, the magnitude of the potential consequences should also be a factor, as well as the likelihood of the risk being realised. During operations which impose a planned short-term risk, additional monitoring of the actual plant state should be undertaken to ensure that the mode of operation and the time during which it persists meet the assumptions in the ALARP case. Unexpected failures of plant and equipment may lead to an increase in risk that is so high that BSLs are exceeded and the risks thus judged “intolerable” (see TOR [2]). In such cases the licensee should be actively managing and prioritising the situation to reduce the risks back to ALARP as quickly as possible. It certainly should not be the case that a facility is allowed to operate at this level of risk unless there is no alternative (see paras 699-700 of the SAPs). Residual Facility Life – Specific Considerations 6.28 The SAPs (para 35) note that as a facility ages, its safety margins may be eroded, for example due to the incidence of, or vulnerability to, faults increasing due to wear etc. Reducing the risk level may not be possible, so a judgement then has to be made whether the continued operation of the facility is acceptable at the higher risk. The future planned lifetime of the facility may be a factor in making such judgements. This sort of situation can be difficult where the ageing is gradual and there is no obvious transition from 'safe' to 'not safe'. In such cases, careful monitoring and regular review, as required of licensees through compliance with their LC15 arrangements (particularly short-term reviews – see T/AST/050 [23]), is likely to be needed. 6.29 The guidance presented here relates to periods that are short in comparison to the total design or operational life of the facility. It also relates to assessment of safety cases either resulting from a Periodic Safety Review or at any time when a significant ageing phenomenon is being considered. 6.30 The following points should be considered by inspectors in this context: i. The safety case should be updated promptly to take account of any relevant new knowledge or experience and data appropriate to the current and predicted future state and mode of operation of the facility. Comparison with modern standards of engineering and operation and risk criteria should be undertaken. ii. The revised risk assessment must show that the facility is tolerable for future operations. For example the numerical risk estimates should not be greater than BSLs. If the risk is deemed to be intolerable then the guidance in SAPs paras 699-700 should be followed. iii. Proposed limits on remaining lifetime may be invoked in making the ALARP demonstration, but this cannot be used to justify a facility operating in the intolerable region. A case not to make an improvement based largely on limited future lifetime would only be acceptable where the maximum extent of the future operational life is irrevocably fixed. In cases where the planned lifetime is not irrevocably fixed, a minimum Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 14 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation period of ten years (or the unavoidable necessary life of the facility, if longer) should be considered the ALARP demonstration (see SAPs para 35). the purposes of for End of Life Legacy – Specific Considerations 6.31 There may be situations, particularly during cleanout and decommissioning, where the risks need to be increased temporarily so that the long-term risks can then be reduced or eliminated (SAPs paras 759-767). Such increased risks need to be balanced against the continuing risks from doing nothing and with due consideration of the alternatives available to address the hazard. Cases arguing for extensive delays to hazard reduction by invoking CBA with significantly discounted future costs need to be guarded against. Concentration on removal of the hazard, or on decreasing its propensity to cause harm should instead be paramount. Arguments based simply on time at risk will not generally be sufficient. 6.32 During the course of hazard reduction, which may be for a significant time, it is expected that suitable engineering and/or operational arrangements will be made to minimise, so far as is reasonably practicable, both the magnitude and time of the higher risk, balancing e.g. operational doses and the potential for accidental releases. Further details on these aspects are addressed in T/AST/026 on Decommissioning). Arguments for allowing an increase in risk 6.33 Licensees may argue that moving to a less protected situation meets the ALARP criteria e.g. by suggesting that increases in risk are more than balanced by the gains in reduced operational costs or increased operating profit. Other factors, particularly those relating to good practice and previous experience, would militate against this argument and, in general, ONR would require previous good practice to be upheld. 6.34 To succeed in an approach where risks appear to increase, the licensee would have to show “changed circumstances”, as noted in para 39 of the HSE ALARP Principles [3], or that the existing situation went well beyond what was required by ALARP. In addition, any case for reducing safety would also have to show that additional safety measures are not reasonably practicable in the new situation. However, where the level of risk is low, and the increase in risk is small and forms part of a package which overall improves health and safety, the licensee’s proposals should be considered in this wider context. 6.35 Other grounds which may be acceptable are where the risks are low and the measures in place can be shown to be unduly conservative as a result of new knowledge. In other cases a change may be forced due to it being impossible to replace like-for-like components due to obsolescence. Another possibility is where the safety case contains generous margins which can be relaxed without any diminution in the required level of safety. Many people feel uncomfortable about accepting increased risks, which is often referred to as "reverse" or "negative" ALARP, but in the past ONR has accepted cases which meet the above criteria and HSE's ALARP principles (para 39 of the HSE ALARP Principles) anticipate the need to deal with such situations. Regulatory Application of ALARP and BAT/BPM 6.36 Another area where an increase in risks (on and/or off-site) can occur is where additional measures need to be taken on the site to reduce the quantity of radioactive material permitted to be discharged to the environment in normal operations. This usually results from activities regulated by the Environment Agency and SEPA to reduce discharges to comply with Best Available Techniques (BAT) (or Best Practical Means (BPM) in Scotland). Possible consequences of these additional measures are that on-site accumulation of radioactive waste will increase (unless a disposal route Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 15 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation exists), or safety risks to workers will rise (e.g. from implementing and/or operating the new measures). 6.37 Concerns were historically expressed by the nuclear industry that different regulatory application of ALARP and BAT in nuclear safety and environmental protection gave a propensity for conflict. This was a factor that prompted a review of the working relationship between HSE and EA in respect to nuclear sites and development of a Statement of Intent between HSE and EA in 2001. A separate Statement of Intent was also developed for HSE interactions with SEPA. 6.38 Given the different terminology used in different legislation and the requirement for licensees to meet all their duties, the term “optimisation” is used in T/AST/026 ‘Decommissioning Technical Assessment Guide’ to refer to the level of protection that meets all the legal requirements of ALARP, BAT, BPM etc. Optimisation is also the term used in the IAEA Safety Fundamentals [17] where Principle 5 states “Protection must be optimised to provide the highest level of safety that can reasonably be achieved.” 6.39 Consequently it is important that, during optioneering studies carried out by the licensee to establish the BAT or BPM option, adequate weighting is given to health and safety aspects so that an overall ALARP solution that balances health, safety and environmental aspects is reached in an optimised manner. Such a balance should consider:       The number of people (workers and the public) who may be exposed to radiation; The likelihood of their incurring exposures; The magnitude and distribution of radiation doses received; Radiation risks arising from foreseeable events; Economic, social and environmental factors. Using good practices and common sense to avoid radiation risks as far as is practical in day to day activities. 6.40 More guidance on how to achieve ALARP in a decommissioning context is set out in T/AST/026. Risk Trade-offs 6.41 If a change to the design or operation of a facility is implemented to reduce a particular risk, it is highly likely that there will be other effects which could alter the risk profile of the facility. Paras 36 to 38 of HSE's ALARP Principles [3] refers to this as Risk Transfer and confirm the importance of considering all of the risks within the licensee's control as part of a balanced decision on how to reduce overall risks to ALARP (see also para 26(d)). It has already been emphasised that the full effect of the implementation needs to be considered in terms of the reduction in risks, but it should be borne in mind that risks may also be increased in other areas. For example, risks from radiological hazards may be from accident or normal operational risks; these could affect the public and/or persons on-site; there may be conventional (non-radiological) risks arising from the changes. It is important therefore, when considering implementation of a modification, to consider whether the licensee has analysed all relevant types of risk and that any increase in risk in other areas is not greater than the decrease in the area being analysed. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 16 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation Dose/Risk Sharing 6.42 When considering doses that are received in normal operation, a certain degree of dose sharing is acceptable to reduce doses to individual workers and hence their risks. The IRR ACoP [12] says that if a choice between restricting doses to individuals and groups has to be made, priority should be given to keeping individual doses as far below dose limits as reasonably practicable. Dose sharing might reduce individual doses further but should not be used as a primary means of complying with dose limits. Priority should instead be given to changing methods of work, improving engineering controls and adopting other means of restricting exposure. In the case of doses received due to accidental releases, the concept of risk sharing for workers by use of occupancy factors may be questionable; individual risk cannot be made acceptable by using many people for short periods so each only gets a small portion of the total risk. Occupancy Factors 6.43 In the analysis of an individual fault scenario, the risks and protection measures should be assessed with respect to the potential dose to a worker who is exposed to the consequences of identified faults/events. The likelihood of a particular fault/event should not be judged acceptable on one facility, and not on another, merely because there are more people working within the first facility to "share" the risk. When summing risks to an individual worker on a facility from all faults (e.g. for comparison against SAPs Target 5), it is acceptable to consider justified "occupancy" factors as not all persons on-site will be exposed to all the risks from the facility. 6.44 Occupancy claims need to be considered carefully as the occupancy under consideration can mean different things:    the fraction of time a specific individual is on-site. If the risk being estimated is to a specific individual this factor is valid. the fraction of risks on a particular facility or site that a specific individual may be exposed to. Again if calculating specific individual risk is the aim, including this factor is valid. the likelihood of a worker being in the vicinity of an accident. Where a worker may be present for part of the time and the fault is random, there are two situations to consider: in assessing the risk in cases where the occupancy is controlled it is valid to consider the occupancy factor, but where the occupancy is uncontrolled (e.g. in a corridor) the dose should be assessed assuming a person is present. In considering SAPs Target 6, which addresses doses from single accidents on site, it is expected that estimates will be made assuming someone is present unless adequate control measures are in force to ensure their absence (see SAPs Annex 2). Should the summed risk to any worker be high however, then justified occupancy claims can be considered, along with any proposals to control exposure etc. 6.45 Long-Term Risk Assessment 6.46 There is a growing perception that risks that are imposed, that are unevenly distributed, or that affect future generations should be scrutinised and seen to be justified (R2P2 particularly those associated with radioactive waste management and decommissioning, run over many years, and the risks that result may affect future generations of workers and the public as well as the present generation. For such , paras 47 & 48). Some projects in the nuclear industry, and Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 17 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation cases the risks should be assessed in a holistic manner and not restricted to part of the overall time period or part of a process. 6.47 In general, we should seek to protect future generations at least as well as we seek to protect the present one. Although it could be argued that the next few generations may gain some indirect benefit, the uncertainty of how they will view the risks left to them (and indeed the uncertainty of any benefits further into the future) argues for a precautionary approach (R2P2 demonstration that risks are indeed ALARP. We would therefore expect to see particular efforts made to demonstrate that risks to future generations are at least consistent with the levels of risk that would be accepted as adequate protection for the present generation. , paras 89-93) and hence a particularly stringent 6.48 Given the uncertainties in estimating long-term future risks, good practice and the application of the Engineering Key Principles hierarchy with the emphasis on control of hazard (see SAPs EKP 1-4) are likely to be much more important than numerical risk estimates and CBA in establishing the way forward. In this context it is worth bearing in mind that a 1x10 -4/ yr risk for one year implies a low likelihood of someone being hurt, whereas 1x10 -4/ yr for 10000 years implies a high likelihood of an adverse consequence. SFAIRP and the Requirement for Risk Assessment 6.49 The requirement to carry out a risk assessment and produce a safety case is absolute and cannot be argued against on the grounds that the costs are grossly disproportionate to the risks (see para 26c). Instead, the scope, depth and effort put into the risk assessment / safety case should be proportionate to the level of risk and hazard. 7. ALARP AND REGULATORY DECISIONS 7.1 Licensees may need to conduct their undertakings in a given way in order to secure certain societal or public interest benefits such as activities in “the interests of national security” or “keeping the lights on”, or because “the priorities for a fixed national (government) budget lie elsewhere”. Claims related to such “Strategic Imperatives” can sometimes appear in safety cases in the context of “time”, or “trouble” aspects, on the sacrifice side of the ALARP balance. Inspectors should however, make their judgements on whether the legal duty to reduce risks to ALARP has been met independently of such considerations, as these normally lie beyond the scope of HSWA. Instead these Strategic Imperatives will normally be a factor informing ONR’s enforcement decisions. For instance, if risks have not been reduced to ALARP, relevant Strategic Imperatives can and should be taken into account by those with delegated authority when determining proportionate enforcement action, or in decisions whether to grant a permission. Guidance on what to do when dealing with Strategic Imperatives is provided in the following two sections. Enforcement Decisions 7.2 Enforcement decisions within ONR are made in accordance with the ONR’s Enforcement Policy Statement [22], which sets out the principles, purpose and methods of enforcement. A spectrum of enforcement options is available depending on the circumstances. These range from providing verbal or written advice, delaying or refusing to grant a permission for a given activity, issuing Improvement or Prohibition Notices, through to prosecution in the most serious cases. Reflecting this, HSE has developed the Enforcement Management Model (EMM) to guide regulators in making consistent and proportionate enforcement decisions. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 18 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 7.3 ONR guidance on applying the EPS within the framework of the Nuclear Licencing regime is provided in “The Enforcement Management Model in ONR”, NS-ENF-GD-002 [19]. In applying the EMM to ALARP decisions, inspectors should establish the seriousness of shortfalls with reference to the risk gap (i.e. between where the licensee is and where they ought to be when complying with the law). This should then be used to inform ONR’s decision on appropriate enforcement action. It is at this point in the EMM process that Duty holder and Strategic Factors should be taken in to account, and not when determining legal compliance. Permissioning Decisions Similarly, where the licensee’s ALARP justification is part of a request to grant a permission required under a nuclear site Licence Condition, ONR inspectors should distinguish between wider arguments related to Duty holder and Strategic Factors and the judgement as to whether risks are reduced to ALARP. Ultimately, consideration of an ALARP shortfall in the context of these wider factors may lead ONR to nonetheless grant permission for the activity, e.g. where it is deemed in the public interest to do so. The supporting audit trail (i.e. the Project Assessment Report, PAR) for such Licence Instruments should clearly define the rationale for the decisions made, and detail why the permission has been granted, despite the evident shortfall(s) in demonstrating ALARP. It must also be recognised that, in accordance with ONR’s regulatory philosophy and irrespective of any claims of Strategic Factors, there may be situations where the licensee has not adequately demonstrated that risks have been reduced to ALARP, but where the gap is such that it would be disproportionate not to grant a permission. In these cases, inspectors should work with the licensee to bring the situation back into legal compliance, but this process should not (depending on the EMM) necessarily mean that our permission is withheld. ONR’s published guide to risk informed regulatory decision making [28] gives further information on the factors involved in decision making and notes that “There can also be other wider factors (beyond dutyholder and strategic factors), such as ‘in the interests of national security’, that we term strategic imperatives, where we do not have the authority or sufficient knowledge of the considerations involved to judge the significance of such factors. Strategic imperatives would not normally change our regulatory decision, but may require a different course of action. In such circumstances, we would work collaboratively with the dutyholder to ensure the best safety outcome within the constraints of the imperative, but also to ensure that all relevant stakeholders understand the implication of the chosen course of action. Such circumstances have been, and are likely to remain, extremely rare.” 8. CHECKLIST Attached at Annex 1 is a checklist of the main assessment points which will help inspectors decide whether all the key points have been addressed by the licensee in its ALARP assessment. 7.4 7.5 7.6 8.1 Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 19 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 9. REFERENCES 1. Reducing risks protecting people. HSE Books 2001 2. HSE. The Tolerability of Risk from Nuclear Power Stations, HMSO, 1992. 3. Principles and guidelines to assist HSE in its judgements that dutyholders have reduced risk as low as reasonably practicable. 4. Assessing compliance with the law in individual cases and the use of good practice. 5. Policy and Guidance on reducing risks as low as reasonably practicable in design. 6. The Regulation of Nuclear Installations in the UK including Notes for Applicants. 7. Principles for Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) in support of ALARP decision. 8. ALARP "at a glance". 9. Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) Checklist. 10. ONR. Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities. 2014. 11. NRPB - Documents of the NRPB vol. 4(2) 1993 12. HSE. Work with Ionising Radiation, Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017, Approved Code of Practice and Guidance, ISBN 978071766621 13. Not Used. 14. Harbison, S. A Safety Assessment and Objectives for Plant Designed 40 Years Ago, Paper presented at ENS Conference, TOPSAFE 95, Budapest 15. Haywood S M et al COCO-1: Model for Assessing the Costs of Offsite Consequences of Accidental Releases of Radioactivity, NRPB-R243, 1991 16. COCO-2: A model to Assess the Economic Impact of an Accident, HPA-RPD-046, 2008 17. IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles: Safety Fundamentals no. SF-1. IAEA Vienna 2006 http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1273_web.pdf 18. HM Treasury Green Book. therein to the EMM. 19. Guidance on the use of the Enforcement Management Model NS-ENF-GD-002 See links 20. Nuclear power station generic design assessment – guidance to requesting parties HSE 21. Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association – WENRA 22. ONR’s Enforcement Policy Statement 23. T/AST/050 - ND Technical Assessment Guide on Periodic Safety Reviews 24. Not used Nuclear safety Cases 25. T/AST/051 - ND Technical Assessment Guide on the purpose, scope and content of 26. WENRA statement on safety objectives for new nuclear power plants 2010. http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2012/11/05/wenra_statementonsafetyobje ctivesfornewnuclearpowerplants_nov2010.pdf 27. WENRA guidance on “Timely Implementation of Reasonably Practicable Safety Improvements to existing Nuclear power plants”. 2017. http://www.wenra.org/archives/wenra-guidance-article-8a-nuclear-safety-directive/ 28. ONR, Risk informed regulatory decision making, 2017, www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/risk-informed-regulatory-decision-making.pdf. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 20 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 10. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ACoP ALARP BSL BSL(LL) BSO CBA EA HPA HSE HSAW IAEA IRR NDA NIA PSA PSR R2P2 SAP Approved Code of Practice As Low As Reasonably Practicable Basic Safety Level Basic Safety Level (legal limit) Basic Safety Objective Cost Benefit Analysis Environment Agency Health Protection Agency Health and Safety Executive The Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 International Atomic Energy Agency Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017 Nuclear Decommissioning Authority Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (as amended) Probabilistic Safety Analysis Periodic Safety Review Reducing Risk Protecting People Safety Assessment Principle(s) SFAIRP SEPA TAG TOR WENRA So Far As Is Reasonably Practicable Scottish Environment Protection Agency Technical Assessment Guide(s) Tolerability of Risk Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 21 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 11. APPENDICES Annex 1 - ALARP Checklist A1.1 The risks must be ALARP. If the engineering and operation of the facility gives no cause for concern, and the risks are adequately demonstrated to be "broadly acceptable" (i.e. below all the BSOs) then this is sufficient for ONR assessment purposes. If the risks are above a BSO, then inspectors should consider specifically whether these are reduced to ALARP. A1.2 If the risks exceed a BSL or fall significantly short of an accepted relevant good practice, e.g. evidently poor engineering or sub-standard operations (procedures or implementation) then inspectors need to follow the advice set out in SAPs paras 699- 700. This includes consideration of whether the facility should be shutdown or the activity curtailed. A1.3 The following checkpoints may be relevant in reviewing licensees' safety cases or arguments that the risks are ALARP: 1. Is there evidence of an adequate and fit-for-purpose evaluation of risks that underpins 2. Does the ALARP argument refer only to those risks which the licensee controls (para the ALARP case (para 5.3) 5.4(1)) 3. Affordability is not a legitimate factor in the assessment of costs (para 5.4(2)) 4. ALARP cannot be used to argue against statutory duties (para 5.4(3)) 5. Does the ALARP argument take adequate account of all types of risks, including conventional (i.e. non-radiological) risks (para 5.4(4)) 6. Have all relevant options been considered by the licensee and does the licensee's study of the options begin with the safest (as opposed to the cheapest) option para 5.4(5)) 7. If measures are deemed not reasonably practicable, has partial implementation been considered? Inspectors need also to be wary of "deluxe" measures unduly inflating the cost para 5.4(5)) 8. Is the rigour of ALARP case made commensurate with the level of risk in the scenario 9. For measures deemed not reasonably practicable, has the licensee demonstrated under consideration (para 5.4(7)) gross disproportion (para 5.4(8)) 10. The ALARP arguments should include explicit consideration of qualitative features related to engineering and other types of relevant good practice (para 6.1 – 6.49). 11. The ALARP argument should be based on comparisons with relevant good practice, informed as necessary by CBA (para 6.13), rather than the other way around. A CBA on its own is not acceptable as an ALARP case. 12. Are all of the relevant engineering SAPs met? If not, has the licensee identified and considered any deficiencies from an ALARP perspective (para 6.8) 13. ALARP applies at all times and arguments employing Time at Risk may need special consideration (para 6.24 – 6.31). 14. Reverse ALARP arguments for increased risk are only allowable in ‘changed circumstances’ or where the licensee can show that the existing situation goes well beyond what is required by ALARP (para 6.35). Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 22 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation 15. Dose sharing: Has the licensee given adequate consideration to changing working methods, engineering controls or other means of dose restriction before proposing dose sharing (para 6.42) 16. Have occupancy factors in assessments of worker risk been properly considered (para 6.43) 17. Have safety and environmental factors been considered in an optimised manner during optioneering studies in order to meet all legislative requirements of ALARP and BAT (para 6.36 – 6.39) 18. Have strategic imperatives been used as justification for the activity where risks are not actually reduced ALARP (para 7.1) Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 23 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation Annex 2 – ALARP for proposed new civil nuclear reactors A2.1 In the context of the Generic Design Assessment (GDA) process for new reactor designs ONR has to judge whether the legal duty of controlling and reducing risks so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP), usually referred to within HSE as ALARP (as low as reasonably practicable), will be met. In contrast to the majority of cases we normally deal with at existing licensed sites, the ALARP arguments presented for GDA will not relate to whether additional features should be implemented to an existing design, but will instead involve consideration of the facility’s design as a whole. Thus the position when a new reactor design is presented to us goes beyond the situations considered in other HSE ALARP guidance. A2.2 Although nominally at the design stage, all of the proposed designs are essentially complete in terms of the overall concept and major systems, and have reached that stage after many years of development and optimisation in non-UK regulatory environments. However, the essence of the UK system is goal-setting and the main objective is to see whether the reactor designs represent an ALARP outcome rather than to examine the route by which that end was achieved. Similarly, ONR needs to look at the design holistically and be guided by overall safety rather than focussing on incremental changes (e.g. the thickness of a concrete wall, or level of redundancy in a single system) to individual elements of the safety argument in isolation. Hence the intention is not to seek new, UK-specific design features, but to see that the law is met. Furthermore we recognise there are safety benefits in standardisation: a wider pool of experience will inevitably provide better feedback for future improvement in safety and this must be taken into account. It is also worth noting that the intent is to judge whether the individual designs meet the requirement to demonstrate ALARP on their own merits, not to compare them. A2.3 For the overall ALARP demonstrations we expect the four main areas below to be addressed: 1 There is a clear conclusion that there are no further reasonable practicable improvements that could be implemented, and therefore the risk has been reduced to ALARP. 2 Relevant Good Practice: This is the basic requirement for demonstrating that designs meet the law. The Requesting Party (RP) must set out the standards and codes used and justify them to the extent that we can ‘deem’ them relevant good practice when viewed against our SAPs. This justification is expected to include a comparison with other international/ national standards. Clearly the standards and codes adopted by the RP must be shown to have been met. 3 Options: This will comprise two stages: Firstly an examination of the RP’s rationale for the evolution of the design, using its forerunners as a baseline, looking at why certain features were selected and others rejected and how this process has resulted in an improved design from a safety perspective. Secondly the RP needs to address the question “what more could be done?” and provide an argument of “why they can’t do it” (i.e. why it is not reasonably practicable). This second element could be done by postulating further options for improvement (previously discarded options may be suitable candidates) and evaluating them. Clearly if an option is shown to be reasonably practicable then that option should have been taken, or where it is found not to be excessively expensive to improve safety, then further avenues for risk reduction should be explored. 4 Risk Assessment: The use of risk targets in isolation is not an acceptable means of demonstrating ALARP and we expect to see risk assessments used to identify potential engineering and/or operational improvements as well as confirming numerical levels of safety. The BSOs in the SAPs represent broadly acceptable levels below which we have said that we expect to confine ourselves to considering the validity of the arguments that the BSOs have actually been met. We have also made it clear that Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 24 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation the way in which we apply these numerical targets will depend heavily on the views we form on the engineering (and at a later stage operational practices) and that meeting the BSOs is not a green light for RPs to forego further ALARP considerations. Nevertheless, well-supported numerical risk figures that show BSOs to be met can be an important element of support to the overall ALARP demonstration A2.4 In support of these four elements, ONR expects the following in respect of new commercial reactor designs:  The level of safety must be no less than a comparable facility already working or being constructed in the UK or somewhere else in the world.  As evolutionary designs, which have been designed taking account of experience of earlier ones, the RP must show how the evolution has maintained or improved the design from a safety perspective.  The demonstration should set out how known problem areas (e.g. identified from Operational Experience Feedback (OEF), improved analysis, or improving standards) have been addressed and how and why the particular solution chosen was arrived at.  The Engineering Key Principles (EKP) 1, 2 and 3 of SAPs should be seen as a hierarchy where, all else being equal, the higher up the list the better. Cases where this is not so will need specific justification.  Likewise, the hierarchy within EKP 5 should be addressed in a similar manner.  There should be clarity to the reasons for the choice of design standards and demonstration that the chosen ones lead to the safest reasonably practicable design.  The RP must provide evidence that it has used processes for making design decisions in which safety is clearly considered and has been given the appropriate priority.  Risk/CBA type arguments on their own must not be allowed to override established relevant good practice where this results in degradation in safety. A2.5 In addition we might reasonably expect the RP to provide evidence of the following:  The RP should show how its process is compatible with UK law; specifically how the comparison of sacrifice and risk averted is considered within the design process and what approach is used for determining “gross disproportion”;  Where risk-based CBA-type decision-making has been used, the costings should be appropriate to UK conditions, gross disproportion factors justified and adequate sensitivity studies should be included to demonstrate a robust conclusion;  The design should be considered holistically so that whilst individual systems could be improved, the impact on the overall risks makes further improvement not reasonably practicable;  There is a proper balancing of all risks, worker/public, normal operation/accident, radiological/conventional and the procedures used to ensure this should be clear and adequate;   If any numerical targets for risks are used as cut-offs these must be justified either as a whole or in individual applications; In particular, where intermediate targets rather than the effects on people and the environment are used, the RP should: (a) explain why such a target is used; (b) explain how it is used during design and optioneering; (c) justify the specific target; and (d) justify the levels of “gross disproportion” used. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 25 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation Annex 3 RGP Common questions and answers Remind me! – What is ALARP? A3.1 ALARP stands for “as low as reasonably practicable” and is used when referring to the steps necessary to reduce health and safety risks in order to meet legal duties. It is the term used by ONR, HSE and industry. For almost all purposes it has the same meaning as “so far as is reasonably practicable” (SFAIRP) as used in health and safety legislation. A3.2 A risk has been reduced ALARP when a dutyholder can show that further risk reduction is not justified because the sacrifice associated with doing so would be grossly disproportionate in terms of money, time or trouble. Sections 2 and 3 of the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 require dutyholders to reduce the risks to their employees and to others from their activities SFAIRP. Similar requirements are also reinforced in more specific applications through other health and safety legislation, such as the Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017. A3.3 SFAIRP, and by implication ALARP, are ‘goal-setting’ standards that provide an objective against which a dutyholder must select and then justify its approach to achieving it. Who judges ALARP? A3.4 Ultimately, whether a dutyholder has complied with its legal duty to reduce risks ALARP in a particular case may be for a court of law or employment tribunal to decide. A3.5 However, in regulating the industry, ONR (and other regulators) effectively make the required day-to-day judgements, e.g. as part of inspecting and assessing dutyholders against their obligations and in deciding whether to take enforcement action. We use a body of knowledgeable and experienced inspectors, assisted by comprehensive guidance, to make these judgements on the basis of the available evidence. ONR also considers ALARP during the assessment of a licensee’s safety case carried out as part of making a permissioning decision. A3.6 Note that our regulatory decisions (including those relating to enforcement action or the granting of permission) also take into account broader factors in addition to whether or not legal standards, including that of ALARP, have been achieved. This is described in our Risk Informed Regulatory Decision Making guidance. What is good practice? ‘Good practice’ is a generic term referring to a wide range of control measures, A3.7 policies, practices and other aspects pertaining to a particular health and safety issue. A3.8 Good practice can refer to physical aspects, including the design of plant and equipment, the fitting of safety mechanisms, mitigating and emergency measures or to the use of particular items of personal protective equipment. It can equally refer to administrative control measures, including things like training practices, maintenance, inspection, testing, decision-making processes or operating instructions. It can also refer to fault, hazard or risk analysis methodologies, strategies, design principles, risk targets and other approaches to safety analysis, substantiation or design. What are the sources of good practice? A3.9 While anyone can propose good practice, there is a hierarchy to its significance based on its formal status and pedigree, i.e. the weight it might carry in a potential court case:  Approved Codes of Practice (ACoPs) carry the strongest weight and have a special legal status. If a dutyholder complies with the approach to a health and Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 26 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation   safety issue set-out in an ACoP, then it is deemed to have complied with the law. A dutyholder may choose to follow a different approach, but then must be able to demonstrate why this is equivalent or it will be considered to be below minimum legal compliance. (Note that an ACoP is usually published as a single document to go with a set of regulations. This will provide the ACoP text together with accompanying non-statutory guidance. The accompanying guidance does not however carry the special legal status of the ACoP.) Published regulatory guidance is also a recognised source of good practice. For nuclear and conventional safety, our principal sources of good practice are the Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) and the additional guidance provided in the Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) and Technical Inspection Guides (TIGs). Other written sources which may be recognised as good practice include guidance produced by:    other government departments; national and international standard-setting bodies, e.g. the British Standards Institute (BSI), International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), International Standards Organisation (ISO), the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) or Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association (WENRA); industry bodies and professional institutes, e.g. the Safety Directors’ Forum (SDF), Nuclear Engineering Directors’ Forum (NEDF) or World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO).  There may be unwritten sources of good practice, for example through well- defined and well-established practices across a particular industrial sector. A3.10 The mixing of different standards – ‘pick and mix’ – is discouraged where there is an applicable encompassing standard, particularly regulatory expectations or those from authoritative national and international bodies, such as British Standards or IAEA Safety Standards. However, a case can be made in some circumstances to draw upon standards from different sources if the situation warrants it. The important thing is to consider the overall outcome against the ALARP requirement. It is also important to ensure that we do not apply inappropriate regulatory pressure to ‘gold-plate’ the solution beyond what would be ALARP. for standards set-out in What is RGP? A3.11 RGP stands for ‘Relevant Good Practice’. It refers to the body of good practice that is specifically relevant to the situation and that which, if implemented, would typically be considered to meet the requirement to reduce risks to as ALARP for a particular situation. A3.12 The concept of RGP is used because there is usually well-established good practice in addressing a particular issue and it is usually unnecessary for a dutyholder to revert to a detailed, first-principles ALARP demonstration in most circumstances. RGP is therefore helpful in avoiding unnecessary replicated effort where the standard that would be required by the courts and the regulator is well-recognised. This is often true in areas that are common across industry, including many aspects of conventional health and safety and the more widespread aspects of nuclear and radiological safety. A3.13 The concept of RGP is less helpful for unique or unusual circumstances because typical standards and practices are often not fully relevant to the situation. In these cases RGP is only a starting point for a more detailed demonstration against the fundamental ALARP requirement. This is often true for older nuclear facilities which fall short of modern Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 27 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation standards developed since they were constructed. This can be exacerbated by age-related degradation, making decommissioning more challenging. Whilst what is RGP elsewhere should still be used as a starting point, the dutyholder may be able to demonstrate an ALARP approach that does not meet all aspects of the usual standard in the specific circumstances. A3.14 Remember: for something to be RGP it must be ‘relevant’ in that it has been read- across for appropriately similar circumstances. It must also represent ‘good practice’ rather than ‘best practice’ (a practice beyond what the law requires). A3.15 Note that ONR also uses the concept of RGP to underpin its judgment of compliance against other goal-setting requirements in addition to those based on ALARP/SFAIRP, such as “suitable and sufficient” and “adequate” as used in the licence conditions. The remaining questions and answers in this document are generally also applicable to these kinds of goal- setting requirements as well as ALARP. What is the legal basis of RGP? A3.16 RGP does not have a legal basis and is not mentioned in legislation, although a regulator’s view on what is considered to be RGP is likely to be persuasive in a court of law. A3.17 RGP is based on regulatory policy and refers to the controls, standards and approaches that meet the ALARP requirement based on what has been accepted in similar circumstances. It is used to avoid the need for first-principles ALARP justifications being required for commonly encountered circumstances or to provide a starting point for determining the ALARP position in more complex or bespoke situations. Adherence to RGP is not a legal requirement: alternative approaches can be used. Who determines RGP? A3.18 As part of demonstrating ALARP, a dutyholder will need to consider and judge what it considers to be RGP in order to be able to make an argument for the reasonable practicability of the approach it has taken. The arguments and evidence supporting ALARP justifications should be included within the safety case. A3.19 The regulator also needs to consider and judge RGP, based on the sources listed above, to enable regulatory judgments. In doing so, it is important to bear in mind that RGP is only regulatory policy, and represents only an interpretation of what is considered to meet the legal requirement based on similar circumstances (although a regulator’s view on what is RGP will be persuasive in a court of law). Are alternatives to RGP acceptable? A3.20 Definitely! RGP is not the law: it is a regulatory concept that provides a practical mechanism for day-to-day judgments on what would usually be considered to meet the legal requirements based on what has been judged and accepted in similar circumstances. If the same standards of safety can be achieved through different means then this also complies with the law. Can standards lower than RGP be acceptable? A3.21 Yes they can – because it is the overall outcome that matters and lower standards in some areas might be justifiable providing the overall result can be shown in the safety case to be ALARP. However, it can be challenging to argue for lower standards because the RGP (providing that it is relevant and constitutes ‘good’ practice) embodies the approach that has been previously judged to meet the legal standard in similar circumstances. Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 28 of 29 Office for Nuclear Regulation What are the key things I should consider when making regulatory ALARP judgments? A3.22 If you are making an assessment of an ALARP position you should consider the following: Remember that the requirement is to reduce risks to be ALARP and this refers to the overall outcome rather than seeking to narrowly apply ALARP to each individual aspect. RGP refers to those good practices (be they safety measures, standards, etc.) that have been assessed and judged to meet the legal standard in similar circumstances and are applicable to the situation at hand. Only those good practices that are both relevant and ‘good’ (as opposed to ‘best practice’ or inadequate practice) are RGP: you must think carefully whether these are relevant to the situation and provide good practice (as opposed to inadequate practice or best practice). ALARP in relation to older facilities and in decommissioning requires especially careful consideration. RGP on modern design and operational standards is often not fully relevant and it is particularly important to consider the overall outcome, including the long-term safety benefits. Remember that RGP is not mandatory. It is most applicable to commonly- encountered circumstances but is only a starting point in situations that do not fall within the scope of the circumstances under which the RGP has been based. A dutyholder is free to take an alternative approach providing it can demonstrate that it has achieved an ALARP position. It is important to understand how and why a dutyholder considers its position to be ALARP. You must avoid making premature judgments until you have seen a dutyholder’s ALARP case, even when you are confident in the authority of the RGP you have identified. It is important to properly document the sources of any RGP which we have identified and to properly record your reasoning, judgement and the application of our decision-making due process. It is important to ensure appropriate cross-discipline working within ONR to ensure we make balanced and proportionate judgements. You should seek appropriate specialist advice, including the appropriate engineering or human factors expectations and fault analysis. It is important that you make use of the ONR ALARP TAG and the HSE ‘6- pack’ guidance as appropriate, seeking assistance where necessary – such as from the ONR ALARP Working Group.         Report : NS-TAST-GD-005 Revision 10 CM9 Ref: 2019/315236 Page 29 of 29 ns-tast-gd-024.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE MANAGEMENT OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL AND RADIOACTIVE WASTE ON NUCLEAR LICENSED SITES Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 Date Issued: September 2019 Review Date: September 2022 Approved by: Nicholas Blackburn Professional Lead Record Reference: 2019/254780 Revision commentary: Revision 6 TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ..................................................................................................................... 5 5. GOVERNMENT POLICY ................................................................................................... 6 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ............................................................................................... 8 7. REFERENCES ................................................................................................................ 21 8. ACRONYMS .................................................................................................................... 24 9. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................. 25 1. © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 09/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established its Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities (SAPs) [1] which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other dutyholders. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) [2] to guide regulatory decision making. The outcome of an assessment by ONR is to reach an independent and informed judgement on the adequacy of a nuclear safety case [3]. This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors and assessors in the exercise of their regulatory judgment. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This TAG contains general guidance, to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their professional regulatory judgements on the management of nuclear matter on nuclear licensed sites. This TAG has also been written with due cognisance of relevant International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safety standards for the management of radioactive waste [4]. This TAG is also intended to demonstrate how ONR meets the Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association (WENRA) Safety Reference Levels (SRL) for waste and spent nuclear fuel storage [5] and for treatment and conditioning of radioactive waste [6]. The TAG is written as guidance for ONR inspectors to carry out their regulatory duties, it is not written for duty holders and although it may be used by duty holders as a source of guidance or good practice, it should not be interpreted by duty holders as a set of prescriptive legal requirements. This guidance relates to the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste, which is currently being, or may be accumulated or stored on nuclear licensed sites, which have met ONR’s criteria relating to bulk quantities for licensing [7]. In this guidance, the meaning of these terms is as defined in ONR’s Licence Condition Handbook [8]. Some radioactive material and radioactive waste is also nuclear matter, as defined in section 26(1) of the Nuclear Installations Act (NIA65) [9]: “nuclear matter” means, subject to any exceptions which may be prescribed- a) any fissile material in the form of uranium metal, alloy or chemical compound (including natural uranium), or of plutonium metal, alloy or chemical compound, and any other fissile material which may be prescribed; and b) any radioactive material produced in, or made radioactive by exposure to the radiation incidental to, the process of producing or utilising any such fissile material as aforesaid. 2.4 Radioactive material and radioactive waste may be generated as a result of activities associated with the nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear medicine, licensed defence sites, research or as a result of decommissioning. Radioactive material includes materials in store prior to use (e.g. new reactor fuel and radioisostopes), and also certain fissile and other radioactive materials that may be declared as radioactive waste in the future. These materials will require safe long-term management in a similar manner as for radioactive waste. 2.5 This guidance is intended to be applicable to the predisposal management of radioactive material and radioactive waste, at all nuclear facilities on nuclear licensed sites, including nuclear power plant, nuclear chemical plant, storage facilities and disposal facilities. The management of radioactive material and radioactive waste is Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 2 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation closely linked with the management of the decommissioning of nuclear facilities, and these activities require an integrated approach. 2.6 It covers through-life management of all radioactive material and radioactive waste from creation through generation, processing, storage and up to but not including disposal or discharge. It includes all forms of radioactive material and radioactive waste: solid, liquid and gaseous. 2.7 Key terms pertinent to the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste are defined as follows: Accumulation – The gathering or amassing of radioactive material or radioactive waste in any form; Processing – Any operation that changes the characteristics of the waste, including pre-treatment, treatment and conditioning; Keeping – Possession of radioactive material with the intention of use for the purpose for which it was obtained; Storage – Emplacement of radioactive material and radioactive waste in an appropriate engineered facility with the intention of retrieval; Disposal – Emplacement of solid radioactive waste in an appropriate engineered facility without the intention of retrieval and release of liquid or gaseous radioactive waste to the environment, referred to as discharge. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION Nuclear Site Licence Conditions 3.1 All of the licence conditions (LCs) apply and are relevant to activities involving the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste [8]. However, there are a number of LCs that are of particular relevance: LC4 Restrictions on nuclear matter on the site LC5 Consignment of nuclear matter LC6 Documents, records, authorities and certificates LC15 Periodic review LC17 Management systems LC23 Operating rules LC25 Operational records LC28 Examination, inspection, maintenance and testing LC32 Accumulation of radioactive waste LC33 Disposal of radioactive waste LC34 Leakage and escape of radioactive material and radioactive waste LC35 Decommissioning. Ionising Radiation Regulations 2017 3.2 The Ionising Radiations Regulations 2017 (IRR17) control the use of ionising radiation in the workplace with the intent of restricting exposure and limiting dose to the workforce and the public [10]. Some of the regulations are particularly relevant to the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste, examples include:  Regulation 8 (radiation risk assessments) Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 3 of 27                  Office for Nuclear Regulation     Regulation 9 (restriction of exposure) Regulation 12 (dose limitation) Regulation 29 (accounting for radioactive substances) Regulation 30 (keeping and moving of radioactive substances). The Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations 2009 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.8 Legislation governing intra-national and international transport of radioactive materials is based on IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials, currently Specific Safety Requirements No. SSR-6 (SSR-6). These regulations are translated into European modal regulations (e.g. the Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR) and Rail (RID) transport, respectively), within which radioactive materials are referred to as Class 7 (out of 9 classes) Dangerous Goods. The modal regulations are given legal effect in Great Britain via the Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations (CDG) [11]. Specific paragraphs within the regulations prescribe the different safety requirements for radioactive material, packagings and packages (see NS-TAST-GD-99 for further details [2]). Environmental Permitting Regulations 2016 The Environment Agency (EA) and Natural Resources Wales (NRW) regulate the disposal of radioactive waste from nuclear licensed sites under the Environmental Permitting Regulations 2016 (EPR16) in England and Wales, respectively [12]. Nuclear licensees in England and Wales are exempt from the EPR16 requirement to obtain a permit from the relevant environmental regulator to accumulate radioactive waste and/or keep and use radioactive material (EPR16 Schedule 23). For further guidance on how ONR works with the environmental regulators on matters of mutual interest, see the Memoranda of Understanding for EA [13] and NRW [14] and supporting guidance [15] and [16], respectively. Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations 2018 The Scottish Environment Protection Agency (SEPA) regulates the management and disposal of radioactive waste on nuclear licensed sites under the Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations 2018 (EASR18) in Scotland [17]. SEPA has also published guidance on its standard conditions for authorisations for radioactive substances activities [18]. Nuclear licensees in Scotland now require a permit from SEPA for the management of radioactive waste on site, and for the long term storage of radioactive waste prior to disposal (EASR18 Schedule 8). Inspectors should be aware that SEPA’s duties and powers now explicitly apply to any activities involved in the management of radioactive waste on nuclear licensed sites, in so far as such activities have the potential to give rise to exposures to the environment or the public, now or in the future. Nuclear licensees in Scotland remain exempt from the requirement for a permit from SEPA to keep and use radioactive material on nuclear licensed sites. 3.9 ONR and SEPA have agreed to work together to ensure that ONR’s principal function and SEPA’s general purpose can be achieved. This agreement is reflected in the updated MoU between ONR and SEPA [19] and the associated MoU Guidance [20]. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 4 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS Safety Assessment Principles 4.1 The SAPs provide nuclear inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory judgements on the safety of activities on nuclear installations, and also recognises the legal duty on licensees to reduce risk so far as is reasonably practicable (SFAIRP). The SAPs are split into sections relating to different aspects of nuclear safety. One section of the SAPs is dedicated to radioactive waste and those principles are summarised here:  RW.1 – Strategies for radioactive waste A strategy should be produced and implemented for the management of radioactive waste on site  RW.2 – Generation of radioactive waste The generation of radioactive waste should be prevented or, where it is not reasonably practicable, minimised in terms of quantity and activity  RW.3 – Accumulation of radioactive waste The total quantity of waste accumulated on site at any time should be minimised so far as is reasonably practicable  RW.4 – Characterisation and segregation Radioactive waste should be characterised and segregated to facilitate its subsequent safe and effective management  RW.5 – Storage of radioactive waste and passive safety Radioactive waste should be stored in accordance with good engineering practice and in a passively safe condition  RW.6 – Passive safety timescales Radiological hazards should be reduced systematically and progressively. The waste should be processed into a passive state as soon as is reasonably practicable  RW.7 – Making and keeping records Information that might be needed for the current and future safe management of radioactive waste should be recorded and preserved. 4.2 In addition to the RW SAPs, the following SAPs may also be of particular relevance to both radioactive material and radioactive waste:      FP.8 – one of the fundamental principles that underpin the SAPs and which outlines ONR’s expectations regarding protection of present and future generations. SC.1, SC.3 to SC.8 – these principles relate to the process for producing safety cases, including their characteristics, content, maintenance and ownership. RP.1 to RP.7 – these principles relate to radiation protection and control of areas to limit spread of radioactive contamination. ENM.1 to ENM.6 – these principles relate to the control of nuclear matter on the nuclear licensed site. DC.1 to DC.9 – these principles relate to arrangements for decommissioning of a facility, which apply at all stages of the lifecycle of a facility. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 5 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation                 RL.1 to RL.8 – these principles relate to land quality management. ECS.1 to ECS.5 – these principles relate to classification and standards of structures, systems and components (SSC) employed to deliver safety functions. EMT.2 – this principle relates to the regular and systematic examination, inspection, maintenance and testing of SSC. EAD.1 to EAD.5 – these principles relate to the management of ageing and degradation of SSCs that may be required for the full lifetime of the facility. Technical Assessment Guides 4.3 There are a number of other TAGs that may be of relevance to the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste [2]: NS-TAST-GD-005 ONR guidance on the demonstration of ALARP; NS-TAST-GD-023 Control of processes involving nuclear matter; NS-TAST-GD-026 Decommissioning on nuclear licensed sites; NS-TAST-GD-033 Duty holder management of records; NS-TAST-GD-081 Safety aspects specific to storage of spent nuclear fuel; NS-TAST-GD-083 Land quality management; NS-TAST-GD-101 Geological disposal. IAEA Requirements and WENRA Safety Reference Levels 4.4 In addition to the SAPs, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Safety Standards and the Safety Reference Levels (SRLs) developed by the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) are considered to be UK relevant good practice (RGP). 4.5 The most relevant IAEA documents are: General Safety Requirements: Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste (GSR Part 5) [4]; Safety Specific Guide: Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste from Nuclear Power Plants and Research Reactors (SSG-40) [21]; Safety Specific Guide: Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste from Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities (SSG-41) [22]. 4.6 The most relevant WENRA SRLs for the management of radioactive waste are: Waste and spent fuel storage [5]; Treatment and conditioning of radioactive waste [6]; 4.7 The IAEA requirements and WENRA SRLs have been explicitly considered during development of this TAG. 5. GOVERNMENT POLICY 5.1 The last full review of Government policy on radioactive waste was in 1994/95; the conclusions were set out in Cm2919 [23]. 5.2 The following key principles arose from this policy:  Radioactive wastes should not be unnecessarily created; Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 6 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation           Such wastes as are created should be safely and appropriately managed and treated; and Wastes should be safely disposed of at appropriate times and in appropriate ways. 5.3 These are underpinned by general requirements that: Radioactive waste will be manages and disposed of in ways which protect the public, workforce and environment; and Radioactive waste management should safeguard the interest of existing and future generations and the wider environment, and in a manner that commands public confidence and takes due account of costs. 5.4 5.5 5.6 Radioactive waste disposal is a devolved matter in the UK, and the relevant Governmental bodies have since elaborated on various aspects of policy as described in the following sections. The following sections on radioactive waste management policies in the UK refer to specific classifications of waste: higher activity radioactive waste (HAW) and low level waste (LLW). Further information on these and other waste classifications is provided in Reference [23] and Appendix A. Policy for HAW (England and Wales) In 2006 the Committee for Radioactive Waste Management (CoRWM) published its recommendations for the long term management of higher activity wastes (HAW) [24]. In response, the UK Government established that deep geological disposal is the preferred route for HAW in England and Wales. Since then, the Government has set out (in 2008) and updated (in 2014 and 2018) the framework for managing HAW in the long term through geological disposal, coupled with safe and secure interim storage and on-going research and development to support its optimised implementation: Managing Radioactive Waste Safely (MRWS), 2008 [25] Implementing Geological Disposal, 2014 [26] Implementing Geological Disposal – Working With Communities, 2018 [27]. 5.7 The Welsh Government has adopted the policy of geological disposal for the long term management of HAW; their current policy is set out in the following documents: Welsh Government Policy on the Management and Disposal of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste, 2015 [28] Geological Disposal of Higher Activity Waste: Community Engagement and Siting Process, 2015 [29] Geological Disposal of Higher Activity Waste: Working with Communities, 2019 [30]. Policy for HAW (Scotland) 5.8 Scotland's policy for HAW is that long-term management of HAW should be in near- surface facilities which should be located as near to the site where the waste is produced as possible so that the need to transport the waste over long distances is minimal. The policy also states the need to demonstrate how facilities will be monitored and how waste packages, or waste could be retrieved. The current policy is set out in the following documents:  Scotland’s Higher Activity Radioactive Waste Policy, 2011 [31] Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 7 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation  Implementation Strategy for Scotland’s Policy on Higher Activity Radioactive Waste, 2016 [32]. Policy for LLW (UK) 5.9 The UK policy for the management of solid low level waste (LLW) is set out in the following document:  Policy for the Long Term Management of Solid Low Level Radioactive Waste in the United Kingdom, 2007 [33]. 5.10 A complementary UK Strategy on solid LLW was published in 2016 [34]. The key aim of the LLW policy is to provide a high-level framework within which individual LLW management decisions can be taken flexibly, to ensure safe, environmentally- acceptable and cost-effective management solutions that appropriately reflect the nature of the LLW concerned. 5.11 A key component of the policy is definitions for Low Level Waste as in Appendix A. 5.12 In its policy, Government looks to the various regulators to maximise the consistency of their approaches in regulating radioactive waste management, including disposal of LLW, and on matters relating to delicensing and clean-up of nuclear sites and other land contaminated by radioactivity. Government also looks to the regulatory bodies to make clear, through published material, the steps that have been taken to address this requirement. 5.13 In its policy, Government states that plans for the management of all radioactive waste, including LLW, must be developed by waste managers. These plans must be prepared in a form, and to a level of detail, suitable for consideration by the relevant regulatory bodies. 5.14 All nuclear licensed sites should have a plan for the management of their LLW holdings and predicted future arisings that is part of a wider integrated waste management strategy, and is compatible with proposed end states. 5.15 The environment agencies’ guidance on the decommissioning and clean-up of nuclear licensed sites sets out their expectations for waste management plans [35]. 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS Fundamental expectations 6.1 ONR has four fundamental expectations, which it expects licensees to meet so far as is reasonably practicable. These expectations are as follows:     Generation of radioactive waste should be avoided, where radioactive waste is unavoidable, generation should be minimised according to the waste hierarchy Radioactive material and radioactive waste should be managed safely throughout its lifecycle in a manner that is consistent with modern standards Predisposal management of radioactive waste should take account of the anticipated disposal route, and full use should be made of existing routes Where the disposal route is not yet available, radioactive material and radioactive waste should be put into a passively safe state as soon as reasonably practicable for interim storage pending future disposal, or other long-term solution. 6.2 These fundamental expectations should form a common thread through any assessment relating to the management of radioactive waste or radioactive material. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 8 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation Joint Guidance on the Management of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste on Nuclear Licensed Sites 6.3 Whilst ONR regulates the management of radioactive waste on nuclear licensed sites and the environment agencies regulate disposals, the regulators work together on decisions concerning permissioning of activities relating to HAW [36]. This is necessary to ensure both safety and environmental protection can be achieved over the long timescales associated with the management of HAW. 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 To this end, the environment agencies and ONR have published joint guidance on the management of HAW on nuclear licensed sites [37] (the Joint Guidance). The Joint Guidance covers all aspects relating to the safe and secure management of HAW produced on nuclear licensed sites. In assessments relating to HAW, inspectors should look to the Joint Guidance for further details on joint regulatory expectations. However, the principles therein may also be relevant to the management of other radioactive waste, and also to radioactive material, for example spent fuel. In addition to providing guidance on regulatory expectations for the management of HAW, the Joint Guidance also describes the regulatory process by which licensees may obtain regulatory acceptance of their proposals. Strategies for the management of radioactive waste In line with Government Policy [23], ONR expects licensees to produce and maintain a strategy that describes their approach to the current and future management of radioactive material and radioactive waste. If a licensee is responsible for a number of sites, then it may be appropriate for the licensee to produce a corporate strategy supported by a series of site-specific strategies. In selecting a preferred strategy, licensees should demonstrate that a full range of management options have been examined, taking account of all technical factors, social factors, Government Policies and international agreements. The reasons for reaching the preferred strategy should be recorded and major assumptions and uncertainties should be identified, together with the approach for their resolution. The scope of the strategy should include all materials and wastes arising on a site, including secondary wastes and those expected to arise from final decommissioning. The strategy should take account of interdependencies between waste streams and processes among all steps to demonstrate that an optimum management process is delivered. 6.10 The licensee’s strategy should identify the inventory of its nuclear liabilities and describe the means of managing each waste stream from generation to disposal by practical and cost-effective methods. The strategy should cover the complete lifecycle of the material and associated facilities, and should include routine discharges of liquid and gaseous radioactive wastes. The strategy should not be restricted to the consideration of nuclear matter that licensees currently regard as radioactive waste: it should also cover all radioactive material, including materials held up in store prior to operational use, spent nuclear fuel, other stocks of fissile and recyclable material and radioactively contaminated land (referred to as an ‘accumulation of nuclear matter’; see NS-TAST-GD-83 [2]). 6.11 The strategy should describe how the licensee will provide and maintain the arrangements to ensure that the radioactive material and radioactive waste is managed safely until its ultimate disposal, including the provision of an appropriate organisation and supporting infrastructure. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 9 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.12 The strategy should be linked to, or integrated with the strategy for decommissioning of nuclear facilities including the management of radioactively contaminated land and the ability to dispose of the resulting wastes. 6.13 The strategy should demonstrate how the objectives of the OSPAR Convention have been taken into account, in particular, the impact on the volume and total activity of on- site waste arisings of solid and liquid wastes, options for storage and ultimate disposal, and implications for compliance with the ALARP principle. The UK strategy for radioactive discharges, which was reviewed in 2018 [38], aims to prevent pollution of the OSPAR maritime area (the North East Atlantic) from radiation through progressive and substantial reductions of discharges, emissions and losses of radioactive substances. 6.14 The manner and form in which they choose to prepare, maintain and document the information relating to their strategies is a matter for the licensees. It is not the aim of this guidance to be prescriptive; however, strategies are expected to contain the following elements:  Descriptions of:      the licensee’s radioactive waste management objectives and policy; the current and future waste inventory, including decommissioning wastes and radioactive materials that may be declared as waste in the future; the preferred option for managing each waste stream throughout its lifecycle to disposal, including programmes showing timescales, methods and proposed disposal route. For wastes where disposition is not defined fully or optimised, a description of the management arrangements for these, including strategies to minimise generation of these in future; the justification of the preferred option based on ALARP and Best Available Techniques (BAT), including the alternative options examined, the selection factors taken into account, major assumptions and the availability of disposal routes; how the balance between foreclosure of disposal options and passive safety has been addressed, and resolved in cases where there may be conflict.      Demonstration of consistency with Government Policy and ONR’s fundamental expectations for radioactive waste management; Significant uncertainties should be identified, the impact assessed and the approach for resolution described; Results of analyses to assess the sensitivity of the selection of the preferred option to assumptions, uncertainties and factors; Approach to ensuring safety including, where appropriate, demonstration that hazards posed by legacy wastes are being adequately controlled and progressively reduced; Corporate arrangements and infrastructure for continuing capability to meet licensee responsibilities. 6.15 The strategy should contain sufficient detail to be standalone, but may be supported by a number of other documents, including individual documents describing waste stream lifecycle management, site lifetime plan, site decommissioning strategy and site strategy for end states. In some cases, the strategy may be encompassed by existing documents, such as Waste Management Plans for LLW. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 10 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.16 Further guidance on the production of radioactive waste strategies can be found in the Joint Guidance [37]. Licensees may choose to present their strategy in the form of an Integrated Waste Strategy (IWS) document, for which NDA has produced guidance on the form and content of such documents [39]. Application of ALARP across the lifecycle 6.17 ONR expects licensees to manage radioactive waste in a manner that is compatible with ultimate disposal, or other long-term solution, and, unless justified on safety grounds, does not unnecessarily foreclose any foreseeable management options. The risks should be assessed in a holistic manner and not restricted to part of the overall time period. 6.18 However, the nature of radioactive waste management means that multiple facilities are likely to be involved in the different aspects relating to generation, processing, storage, transport and disposal, and for HAW, these activities are expected to take place over a significant period of time. Safety cases specific to individual facilities in radioactive waste management are unlikely to provide sufficient information on the case for the management that covers the whole waste lifecycle. 6.19 Additionally, there may be situations, particularly during post operation clean-out and decommissioning, where the risks may increase temporarily so that the long-term risks can then be reduced or eliminated. Such increased risks need to be balanced against the continuing risks from doing nothing and with due consideration of the alternatives available to address the hazard. 6.20 Therefore, the case for safe management of some waste streams across their whole lifecycle needs to be considered on a case-by-case basis, taking account of all factors, to ensure that an appropriate balance is achieved. These factors include requirements imposed by the environmental permit (including optimisation, BAT and disposability) and any waste acceptance criteria for the final disposal facility. The licensee also needs to address the risk that future disposal options may require the wastes to be reworked into an alternative form and also that reworking may be necessary as a result of deterioration of the waste packages or accidental damage. For HAW, Radioactive Waste Management Ltd. (RWM) has an advisory role, and it is for the licensee to seek appropriate advice from RWM. The advice may be used by the licensee as part of the case for safe management of the waste across the lifecycle. 6.21 In addition to the requirement to produce adequate facility safety cases, licensees should also demonstrate how the key elements of long-term safety and environmental performance will be delivered for the management of radioactive waste across the lifecycle, which may not be addressed in the individual plant safety cases and environmental documentation. Where waste is transferred between multiple plants or sites, good practice would suggest production of the case for its overall management early in the waste stream lifecycle, enabling its maintenance and update upon subsequent transfer(s). The case for a particular waste stream should cover the period from generation, through processing, storage, transport and up to the removal of the waste stream from site for eventual disposal, or other long-term solution. 6.22 The manner and form in which they choose to prepare, maintain and document the information relating to the case for management of radioactive waste is a matter for the licensees, and should be proportionate to the hazard presented by the waste. Licensees may choose to present their case in the form of a Radioactive Waste Management Case (RWMC). Further guidance on the form and content of RWMCs for HAW can be found in the Joint Guidance [37]. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 11 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation Predisposal management of radioactive waste 6.23 Radioactive waste should be managed in a manner that minimises the need for processing, and that it is compatible with anticipated facilities for ultimate disposal or long-term solution. 6.24 The following steps, as identified in GSR Part 5 and discussed in more detail below, are key to the safe management of radioactive waste: Generation Processing Storage     Waste acceptance criteria. 6.25 Whilst the next sections are focussed on the predisposal management of radioactive wastes, many of the principles may be applicable to the management of radioactive materials. Further guidance on the predisposal management of HAW can be found in the Joint Guidance [37]. Generation 6.26 Licensees should demonstrate that radioactive waste is not unnecessarily created, and that the generation and accumulation of radioactive waste is minimised. 6.27 Licence Condition 32 requires licensees to make and implement adequate arrangements for minimising, so far as is reasonably practicable, the rate of production and total quantity of radioactive waste accumulated on site. Licence Condition 4(1) requires licensees to ensure that no nuclear matter is brought onto site, except in accordance with adequate arrangements for this purpose. 6.28 The licensee should demonstrate that adequate steps have been taken first to avoid the creation of radioactive waste, and then to minimise the amount generated, both in terms of volume and activity, initially in the design phase and then throughout the lifetime of facilities that generate or manage radioactive waste. Generation also includes the transfer of radioactive material or radioactive waste from other national and international sites; where this occurs, ownership shall be clear and unequivocal. 6.29 The licensee should demonstrate suitable and sufficient design features and operational procedures to support the management of radioactive waste, which should be subject to systematic review and review as necessary. 6.30 The licensee’s approach to the minimisation of radioactive waste shall include application of the waste management hierarchy, the key principles of which should be reflected within the operational procedures. Inspectors should be cognisant that licensees are also required by the environment agencies to demonstrate that waste management options have been optimised using BAT; this should be balanced with ONR’s requirement for risks to be ALARP (see NS-TAST-GD-005 on the demonstration of ALARP [2]). ONR’s expectations for the application of waste minimisation, which encompass the waste hierarchy, include the following: Minimisation of the production of secondary wastes;      Segregation of waste streams; Preventing spread of contamination; Recycling and reusing material; Clearance and exemption; Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 12 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation    Activity reduction; Volume reduction; Disposal. 6.31 The generation of wastes that may be difficult to convert into a passive form for storage, or for which there is no obvious disposal route should be avoided; these wastes may be classed by licensees as ‘problematic’ or ‘orphan’ wastes. Where these wastes exist, licensees should demonstrate adequate arrangements for their management, and further arisings of problematic wastes are minimised. 6.32 The licensee should, so far as is reasonably practicable, characterise and segregate radioactive waste in order to facilitate safe and effective management and disposal. 6.33 The radioactive waste should be characterised in terms of its physical, mechanical, chemical, radiological and biological properties, along with its source or origin. Licensees should develop a systematic approach to characterisation that takes account of regulatory expectations for control and management over the entire lifetime of the radioactive waste, including disposal, or other long-term solution. Characterisation should be done as soon as practicable to inform onward management, but further characterisation may be required at any of the subsequent steps in predisposal management. Licensees should also take into account the requirements for Nuclear Material Accountancy and Control (NMAC) for Safeguards purposes. 6.34 Segregation involves accumulating those materials with similar characteristics, and separating or avoiding mixing those with different characteristics. Where practicable, radioactive waste should be segregated as close to the point of generation as possible. Segregation is most effective if it is taken into account at the process design stage and can contribute significantly to the effective and safe management of radioactive waste. Some legacy wastes have arisen because incompatible wastes have been mixed inappropriately, without due consideration of ALARP across the lifecycle. 6.35 Pre-treatment operations may also be employed to minimise the amount of radioactive waste to be further processed, stored and disposed of. These operations, for example decontamination and incineration, may be employed in order to allow reclassification of the waste at a lower level or to allow the waste to be cleared from regulatory control (see Appendix A). Additionally, licensees may opt for decay storage in cases where wastes are borderline in terms of classification; ONR expects this alternative approach to be justified in terms of ALARP and underpinned as part of the overall waste strategy. Processing 6.36 Licensees should process radioactive waste into a passively safe state as soon as is reasonably practicable. Appendix B provides general principles for radioactive waste management. 6.37 Radioactive waste should be processed as close to the point of generation as practicable and in a form suitable for subsequent waste management steps. Passive safety is most appropriately achieved by providing multiple physical barriers to the release of radioactivity to the environment, which should be designed to provide effective containment and prevent leakage. These barriers include the form of the raw or processed waste, and the packaging, where appropriate. 6.38 To achieve passive safety, the radioactivity should be immobilised, and packaged in a form that is physically and chemically stable. For some wastes, the radioactivity may be immobilised by virtue of the nature of the material, for example, activated uncontaminated metals. The term ‘passive safety’ is more usually associated with Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 13 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation wastes that have already been processed for long-term storage, pending disposal. However, passive safe storage should be provided at all stages in predisposal management of all radioactive waste, to ensure isolation and for environmental protection. 6.39 Passive safety is most relevant in cases where radioactive wastes need to be managed in the long-term, for example HAW, where the disposal route is not yet available. However, ONR expects licensees to consider proportionate application of the principles of passive safety in the management of all radioactive wastes (see Appendix B). 6.40 ONR expects licensees to demonstrate that their processing of radioactive waste will not unnecessarily foreclose future management options, unless there are worthwhile safety benefits. There may be potential for a conflict between the expectations not to foreclose options with expectations for achieving passive safety. In such cases, all relevant factors will need to be taken into account and a judgement made that an appropriate balance has been achieved, and which considers radioactive waste management across the lifecycle. 6.41 There are a number of factors that could influence the timing of the implementation of passive safety, such as: The magnitude of the radioactive hazard; The current form of the radioactive waste; The safety of the current facilities in which accumulation of raw waste is taking, or has taken place; The rate of deterioration of the facilities; The rate of deterioration in the condition of the radioactive waste; Uncertainty in the knowledge of the waste; Integration with decommissioning plans; Radioactive decay or ingrowth; The availability of a disposal route; The need for active safety systems.           6.42 Radioactive waste processing may comprise treatment and/or conditioning, with the ultimate goal of producing a waste product that is suitable for disposal. Examples of treatment options include filtration, ion exchange, incineration and size reduction; these should be employed with the aim of rendering the waste into a state that facilitates conditioning of solid and some liquid wastes, or discharge of liquid and gaseous wastes. Conditioning consists of operations that produce a waste product suitable for safe handling, storage and disposal, taking account of the timescales expected for these onward activities. Examples of conditioning operations include encapsulation of the wastes in a suitable matrix, for example cementitious grout, vitrification or drying of the wastes. 6.43 The processing techniques should be selected on the basis of the characteristics (including non-radiological) of the waste concerned, as these may affect safety during processing and the suitability of the product for onward management to disposal. The licensee should describe the expected properties of the intended waste product and ensure that adequate controls are applied to processes and activities to achieve consistent, safe outcomes. 6.44 For conditioned wastes, the waste packaging should be selected such that it contributes to passive safety over the expected timescales. Dependent on the nature Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 14 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation of the waste and the hazard it presents, the packaging may need to provide shielding in addition to containment, and may also need to take account of criticality safety and heat-bearing wastes. 6.45 Waste products should be uniquely identifiable via appropriate labelling, which should be designed to ensure identification over the expected period and conditions of passive safe storage. Licensees should ensure that labelling of waste packages for disposal is compliant with the requirements set out by the disposal facility. 6.46 Licence Condition 17 requires licensees to make and implement adequate quality management arrangements in respect of all matters which may affect safety. With respect to the predisposal management of radioactive waste, licensees are expected to make and implement adequate arrangements for quality control and quality assurance procedures for the processing and packaging of radioactive waste. These arrangements should ensure that the waste products comply with the relevant specifications, including those of the final disposal facility, or discharge routes for liquid and gaseous wastes. These arrangements should cover the procurement of the packaging and any raw materials used in processing, the quality of the final product and all necessary records. Storage 6.47 Licensees should, so far as is reasonably practicable, store radioactive waste in a passively safe state, such that it can be inspected, monitored, retrieved and preserved in a condition suitable for its subsequent management. 6.48 Licence Condition 4(2) requires licensees to ensure that nuclear matter is stored in accordance with adequate arrangements made for this purpose. Licence Condition 34 requires the licensee to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that radioactive material and radioactive waste is adequately controlled or contained so that it cannot leak or otherwise escape. 6.49 Storage of radioactive waste is by definition an interim measure and can occur at, or between, any steps in predisposal management from generation to disposal, including decay storage as a step on the way to disposal. The storage vessel, for example tanks containing raw liquid wastes or conditioned waste packages, and the storage building or structure form part of the multi-barrier system and should be designed to provide effective containment and prevent leakage. In some cases, the role of the storage building or structure may be limited to providing environmental protection, radiation shielding and presenting a secure boundary against unauthorised intrusion or interference and entry of wildlife. 6.50 The licensee should demonstrate that the design of the storage building or structure is fit for purpose, taking account of the hazards posed by the stored radioactive waste and the expected timescales for passive safe storage, which could extend beyond 100 years in some cases. There should be sufficient storage capacity for waste generated during normal operations, and consideration given to reserve capacity in case of incidents or abnormal events. For storage of liquid wastes, this should include an adequate provision of secondary containment. 6.51 Licensees may wish to use temporary facilities for radioactive waste storage in the short-term to support other processes, for example decommissioning, retrieval of radioactive waste for disposal or passive safe storage, or pending construction of other facilities. In these cases, licensees should demonstrate that the temporary facilities are fit for purpose and that any risks from their use are reduced ALARP through provision of an adequate safety case. ONR expects that such arrangements to be truly temporary and required for relatively short periods of time. If such arrangements are required for longer time periods, then they cannot be regarded as temporary. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 15 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.52 Licence Condition 23 requires the licensee to identify the conditions and limits necessary in the interests of safety (referred to as operating rules). Licence Condition 28 requires the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements for the regular and systematic examination, inspection, maintenance and testing of all plant which may affect safety. 6.53 The fundamental objective of inspection of stored radioactive waste, including unconditioned waste and waste packages is to confirm that they, and the facilities that contain them, are in an acceptable condition for continuing safe storage, retrieval, processing and final disposal, and will remain so for the relevant timescales. 6.54 Licensees should develop a strategy, including criteria (operating rules) against which the condition of the stored radioactive waste and stored waste packages are to be assessed. The strategy should also provide justification as to the method and frequency of inspections. Where strategies are based on predicted rates of degradation, inspections should also be undertaken at appropriate time intervals to confirm that the waste is not evolving to an unexpected degree. The licensee should also include consideration of the environmental conditions within the storage facility. 6.55 Given that an increasing number of waste treatment and storage facilities are being constructed and operated, there is a need to ensure that the operating rules for such facilities are appropriately defined within the safety case and are set in suitably measurable terms. It should be noted that in such cases, surveillance inspections will be infrequent, with long gaps, potentially years, between inspections. Thus, any such operating rules should have robust margins of safety associated with them and be demonstrable within the safety case. 6.56 The inspection strategy should be reviewed for adequacy at appropriate intervals, taking account of results derived from previous inspections. 6.57 Further guidance on ONR’s expectations for dedicated storage facilities that is also applicable to waste packages is given in the TAG for Spent Fuel Management (NS- TAST-GD-081). In addition, NDA has produced industry guidance on the interim storage of HAW [40]. Waste Acceptance Criteria 6.58 Licensees should establish acceptance criteria (operating rules) for radioactive waste and waste packages that are accepted for processing, storage, transport and disposal, and make arrangements for assessment against them. The criteria should specify the radiological, physical, chemical and biological characteristics of the waste or waste packages that are to be processed or stored, taking account of the operating limits and conditions to ensure consistency with the safety case. 6.59 Licensees should also make adequate provisions for the safe management of radioactive waste or waste packages that do not meet the criteria. Data and information recording 6.60 Licensees should make adequate provision for recording and preserving all the data and information that may be required in the future to ensure the safe management of radioactive material and radioactive waste, for as long as such information may be required. 6.61 Licence Condition 6 requires licensees to make adequate records to demonstrate compliance with each condition of the site licence, and to ensure that such records are preserved for 30 years. Licence Condition 25 requires licensees to ensure that adequate records are made a kept of the operation, inspection and maintenance of nuclear facilities; these shall include records relating to the amount and location of all Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 16 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation nuclear matter. Licence Condition 32 requires licensees to make adequate arrangements for the recording the amount of radioactive waste accumulated on site. 6.62 The record preservation period of 30 years reflects the requirements of NIA65 with respect to third party liability. This period starts from the time when decommissioning or decontamination of the plant is complete and all radioactive waste has been transferred to another location or disposed of. However, records required to support the safe management of radioactive waste during long-term storage and final disposal will need to be managed by the licensee over a significant period of time prior to disposal, and subsequently by the operator of the disposal facility. As a result, the records may be required for periods in excess of 100 years and consideration needs to be given to the content of such records, and the form in which they are kept. Records should be held by the licensee until the responsibility for the waste has been passed to another body such as the operator of a disposal facility; however, some information will need to be retained to comply with NIA65 requirements. For on-site disposals, records would need to be maintained until the site is released from regulation. 6.63 ONR expects licensees to develop and maintain a records system that takes into account the purpose, content and storage of records, where the records should Contain all the information that may be required in the future, Be accessible and legible to those who will consult them, and Be assembled and maintained in a secure form. 6.64 The information contained in records is required for two principal reasons: firstly in connection with nuclear liabilities under NIA65, and secondly, to support the safe management of the waste of the whole lifecycle. This guidance is relevant to the latter, in particular the roles that operational records play in supporting future radioactive waste management and decommissioning, including: Review of waste management (and decommissioning) strategies; Review of facility safety cases (periodic review of safety);                  Ensuring continued safe storage; Retrieval of waste and waste packages; Packaging or repackaging of waste; Disposal of waste; Dismantling of structures and plant; Management following incidents; Making modifications. Any successor licensee; The operator of a disposal facility; Local planning authority; Members of the public; International organisations (e.g. IAEA). 6.65 In addition to the regulators and the licensee, records will be of value to other organisations or persons in the future, for example: Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 17 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.66 It is beyond the scope of this guidance to define the extent of the records that licensees are expected to assemble with respect to their nuclear facilities, but the following provides some guidance specifically for radioactive waste: Relevant characteristics, including radionuclide inventory, the amount, radiological classification, its physical, chemical and biological form, any associated uncertainties in the estimates of the characteristics and any criticality-relevant information; Details of the ownership; Origin of the waste and its location on site or within a storage facility; Development and specification of waste packages, including treatment and conditioning;               Details of packaging; Design and construction materials; Inspection, maintenance and testing; Records of all waste disposals; Quality records; Safety case records; Records of incidents; Research and development; Regulatory interactions; Interactions with operators of disposal facilities. 6.67 The fundamental requirement for records storage is that they should be in a secure and accessible form for as long as the information could be of value. Due to the long timescales associated with the interim storage of HAW and some licensee’s decision to defer decommissioning, the projected storage period for many records will be significant, in excess of 100 years in some cases, and should be taken into account in developing the records system. Further guidance on the management of records is provided in Reference [2] (NS-TAST-GD-033). Safety management 6.68 ONR expects licensees to provide safety cases demonstrating the safe operation of all their facilities, including those for the management of radioactive material and radioactive waste. 6.69 Licence Condition (LC) 23(1) requires licensees to provide safety cases that demonstrate the safe operation of all facilities on site, including those specifically for the management of radioactive waste. General guidance on the purpose, scope and content of safety cases for all types of nuclear facilities is available in Reference [2] (NS-TAST-GD-051). However, there are a number of important issues that are particularly relevant to radioactive waste management facilities, which need to be addressed in the safety cases. 6.70 The lack of a disposal facility for HAW means that radioactive waste management facilities will be required to operate safely for very long periods of time. In some cases, these facilities may be new, but in many other cases the plants were built a long time ago and to different standards. Some historical plants remain in good condition, but others may be physically deteriorating. Additionally, some historical plants may be repurposed for the management of radioactive waste. All these issues need to be considered in developing an acceptable safety case. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 18 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.71 The safety case should demonstrate that the design and operation of the facility and its associated arrangements meet modern standards and also justify safe operation throughout the projected life of the facility. For older facilities built to earlier standards, the age of the facility, as well as the anticipated remaining lifetime, must be taken into account and the issue of whether suitable and sufficient measures are available to satisfy ALARP will need to be judged on a case by case basis. A safety case comprises a suite of safety documentation which, when taken together, provide this justification. The specification and format of a safety case is the responsibility of the licensee; however, the following elements that are particularly relevant to radioactive waste management facilities should be considered:  Descriptions of facilities, environment and processes, including buildings and plant; site conditions; waste streams (characterisation and quantities); waste management processes; Consistency with waste management and decommissioning strategies; Identification of modern standards and good practice; Demonstration that radioactive material and radioactive waste are adequately controlled and contained; Operations procedures, including Operating instructions; Relevant limits, rules and conditions for operations; Inspection, maintenance and monitoring schedules.  Demonstration that the plant: is fit for purpose; is consistent with good engineering and good practice; provides adequate safety throughout its proposed life; that risks are reduced ALARP.  That the ageing of structures, systems and components, plant and waste packages is adequately managed. 6.72 Licence Condition 15 requires licensees to make and implement adequate arrangements for the periodic and systematic review and assessment of safety cases. Further guidance on periodic safety reviews can be found in Reference [2] (NS-TAST- GD-050). 6.73 The review would normally be expected to be conducted at least every 10 years and ONR expects licensees to give adequate consideration to the following, as they relate to the management of radioactive materials and radioactive wastes: the accumulation and monitoring of radioactive waste operating experience since the last review maintenance, inspection and testing experience since the last review the history of incidents and abnormal events since the last review. 6.74 The review should ensure that in cases where the facility provides a safety function that cannot be provided by an alternative means, the forward look includes consideration of the time which may be needed to design, construct and commission, or to procure a replacement facility or equipment, should the original be found to be unserviceable at some point in the future, i.e. there must be no interruption in safety Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 19 of 27                    Office for Nuclear Regulation function. This applies particularly to radioactive waste stores, and to other facilities in which the hazard cannot be simply removed by shutting them down. For stores containing significant quantities of radioactive material and radioactive waste, the review needs to consider the entire period until retrieval. This is particularly important if the material or waste is chemically reactive, degrading or could leak to the environment. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 20 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation REFERENCES 7. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 15 Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition Revision 0. November 2014. www.onr.org.uk/saps ONR Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guides. www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_asst_guides ONR Guide, Purpose and Scope of Permissioning, NS-PER-GD-014 Revision 6, November 2016. www.onr.org.uk/operational/assessment/ns-per-gd-014.pdf IAEA, Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste; IAEA General Safety Requirements part 5: GSR Part 5, May 2009. http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1368_web.pdf Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association, Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel Storage Safety Reference Levels, Working Group on Waste and Decommissioning (WGWD), Version 2.2, April 2014. http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2014/05/08/wgwd_storage_report_final.pdf Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association, Radioactive Waste Treatment and Conditioning Safety Reference Levels, Working Group on Waste and Decommissioning (WGWD), April 2018. http://www.wenra.org/media/filer_public/2018/04/17/report_radioactive_waste_treatme nt_and_conditioning_safety_reference_levels.pdf ONR, Interim Position Statement: Interpretation of “bulk quantities” in relation to the storage of radioactive matter, November 2012. http://www.hse.gov.uk/consult/condocs/cd-onr-bulk-interim.pdf ONR, Licence Condition Handbook, February 2017. www.onr.org.uk/silicon.pdf Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (c57), The Stationery Office, 1965, ISBN 9780108502163. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1965/57/contents Ionising Radiations Regulations Statutory Instrument 2017/1075; The Stationary Office; ISBN 9780111162231. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2017/1075 The Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations Statutory Instrument 2009/1348; The Stationary Office; ISBN 9780111480120. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/1348/pdfs/uksi_20091348_en.pdf Environmental Permitting Regulations (England and Wales) 2016, The Stationery Office SI 2016 No 1154. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2016/1154/pdfs/uksi_20161154_en.pdf 13 Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Environment Agency on Matters of Mutual Interest in England, August 2015. http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2015/mou-onr-ea-180815.pdf 14 Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear regulation and the Natural Resources Body for Wales on Matters of Mutual Interest in Wales, February 2015. http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2015/nrw-mou.pdf Guidance to support the Joint Regulatory Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Environment Agency on Matters of Mutual Interest in England, ONR-INSP-GD-061 Revision 1, March 2018. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 21 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 16 17 18 20 21 22 23 24 26 27 Guidance to support the Joint Regulatory Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Natural Resources Body for Wales on Matters of Mutual Interest in Wales, ONR-INSP-GD-063 Revision 1, June 2019. The Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations 2018, SI 2018 No 219. https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ssi/2018/219/pdfs/ssi_20180219_en.pdf The Environmental Authorisations (Scotland) Regulations 2018: Guide to standard conditions for radioactive substances activities, RS-G-100 Version 1.1.0. https://www.sepa.org.uk/media/372002/easr-guide-to-standard-conditions.pdf 19 Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear regulation and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on Matters of Mutual Interest in Scotland, January 2019. http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2019/mou-onr-sepa.pdf Guidance to support the Joint Regulatory Memorandum of Understanding between the Office for Nuclear Regulation and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on Matters of Mutual Interest in Scotland, ONR-INSP-GD-062 Revision 1, June 2019. IAEA Safety Standards, Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste from Nuclear Power Plants and Research Reactors, SSG-40, June 2016. https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1719web-85295015.pdf IAEA Safety Standards, Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste from Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities, SSG-41, August 2016. https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1720web-34641098.pdf HM Government, Review of Radioactive Waste Management Policy, Command 2919, July 1995. Committee on Radioactive Waste Management (CoRWM), Managing our Radioactive Waste Safely – CoRWM’s Recommendations to Government, CoRWM 700 July 2006. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/294118/700_- _CoRWM_July_2006_Recommendations_to_Government_pdf.pdf 25 Managing Radioactive Waste Safely: A Framework for Implementing Geological Disposal, Command 7386; A White Paper by DEFRA, BERR and the Devolved Administrations for Wales and Northern Ireland, June 2008. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/228903/ 7386.pdf Implementing Geological Disposal: A Framework for the long-term Management of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste, July 2014. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/332890/ GDF_White_Paper_FINAL.pdf Implementing Geological Disposal: Working With Communities, December 2018. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/766643/Implementing_Geological_Disposal_- _Working_with_Communities.pdf 28 Welsh Government Policy on the Management and Disposal of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste, 2015. http://gov.wales/docs/desh/policy/150519-policy-on-the-management-and-disposal-of- higher-activity-radioactive-waste-en.pdf 29 Welsh Government, Geological Disposal of Higher Activity Waste: Community Engagement and Siting Process, December 2015. https://gweddill.gov.wales/docs/desh/publications/151210-geological-disposal-of- higher-activity-radioactive-waste-community-engagement-and-siting-processes- en.PDF Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 22 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 30 Welsh Government, Geological Disposal of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste: Working with Communities, 2019. https://gweddill.gov.wales/docs/desh/publications/190116-geological-disposal-of- higher-activity-radioactive-waste-working-with-communities-en.pdf Scottish Government, Scotland's Higher Activity Radioactive Waste Policy, 2011, ISBN: 978 0 7559 9892 0. http://www.gov.scot/Resource/Doc/338695/0111419.pdf Scottish Government, Implementation Strategy for Scotland’s Policy on Higher Activity Radioactive Waste, December 2016. https://www.gov.scot/binaries/content/documents/govscot/publications/strategy- plan/2016/12/higher-activity-waste-implementation-strategy/documents/00511782- pdf/00511782-pdf/govscot%3Adocument/00511782.pdf Policy for the Long Term Management of Solid Low Level Radioactive Waste in the United Kingdom, March 2007. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/254393/Low_level_waste_policy.pdf UK Strategy for the Management of Solid Low Level Waste from the Nuclear Industry, February 2016. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/497114/NI_LLW_Strategy_Final.pdf 35 Management of radioactive waste from Decommissioning of Nuclear Sites: Guidance on Requirements for Release from Radioactive Substances Regulation, Version 1.0 July 2018. https://www.sepa.org.uk/media/365893/2018-07-17-grr-publication-v1-0.pdf Regulatory Arrangements for the Management of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste on Nuclear Licensed Sites: Regulatory Position Statement – 2017 Update. http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/statement-on-haw-june-2017.pdf The Management of Higher Activity Radioactive Waste on Nuclear Licensed Sites, Joint Guidance from ONR, EA, SEPA and NRW to Nuclear Licensees, Revision 2, February 2015. http://www.onr.org.uk/wastemanage/waste-management-joint-guidance.pdf UK Strategy for Radioactive Discharges – 2018 Review of the 2009 Strategy, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, June 2018. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/718723/2018Rev2009UKStratRadDischargeFin.pdf NDA, ENG01 Specification and guidance on the Content and Format of an Integrated Waste Strategy, Revision 3 October 2012. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/517827/ ENG01-Specification-and-Guidance-on-the-Content-and-Format-of-an-Integrated- Waste-Strategy.pdf NDA, Industry Guidance: Interim Storage of Higher Activity Waste Packages – Integrated Approach, Issue 3 January 2017. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachme nt_data/file/600642/Industry_Guidance_-_Interim_Storage_-_Intetgrated_Approach.pdf 31 32 33 34 36 37 38 39 40 Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 23 of 27 ALARP As low as reasonably practicable Best Available Techniques Carriage of Dangerous Goods and Use of Transportable Pressure Equipment Regulations 2009 CoRWM Committee on Radioactive Waste Management Title of document 8. ACRONYMS BAT CDG EA GDF GSR HAW HLW IAEA ILW LLW NIA65 NMAC NRW RGP SAP SEPA SRL SSC SSG TAG TIG (NS)LC (Nuclear Site) Licence Condition Environment Agency Geological Disposal Facility General Safety Requirement Higher Activity Radioactive Waste High Level Waste International Atomic Energy Agency Intermediate Level Waste Low Level Waste Nuclear Installations Act 1965 Nuclear Material Accountancy and Control Natural Resources Wales Relevant Good Practice Safety Assessment Principle(s) (ONR) Scottish Environment Protection Agency Safety Reference Level (WENRA) Structure, System and Component Specific Safety Guide Technical Assessment Guide(s) (ONR) Technical Inspection Guide(s) (ONR) PSR/PRS Periodic Safety Review / Periodic Review of Safety SFAIRP So far as is reasonably practicable WENRA Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 09/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 24 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 9. APPENDICES APPENDIX A – RADIOACTIVE WASTE DEFINITIONS Higher Activity Radioactive Waste (HAW) 9.1 9.2 9.3 9.4 Higher Activity Waste comprises High Level Waste (HLW) (or heat generating waste), Intermediate Level Waste (ILW) and such Low Level Waste (LLW) as cannot be disposed of at present. High Level Waste (HLW) HLW – radioactive waste that is sufficiently radioactive that the decay heat significantly increases its temperature and the temperature of its surroundings [23]. Typical characteristics of HLW are thermal power above ~2 kW/m3. The heat generated from such waste has to be taken into account when designing storage or disposal facilities. Intermediate Level Waste (ILW) ILW - radioactive waste with radioactivity levels exceeding the upper boundaries for LLW, but which does not require heating to be taken into account for the design of storage or disposal facilities [23]. IAEA guidance is that ILW thermal power is below ~2 kW/m3. Low Level Waste (LLW) 9.5 LLW is defined [33] as:      “radioactive waste having a radioactive content not exceeding four giga- becquerels per tonne (GBq/te) of alpha or 12 GBq/te of beta/gamma activity.” 9.6 The lower activity limit for LLW, below which waste is not required to be subject to specific regulatory control is defined as ‘out of scope’ in the environmental permitting regulations: For England and Wales: EPR16, Schedule 23, Part 2 and Part 3 [12] For Scotland: EASR18, Schedule 8, Part 1 and Part 6 [17]. Very Low Level Waste (VLLW; a sub-category of LLW) 9.7 VLLW is a sub-category of LLW; however amendments to legislation in 2011 means that this sub-category is now obsolete. Notwithstanding this, the term continues to be used in nuclear policy and guidance documents, as well as some environmental permits for England and Wales. The following definitions are taken from the UK Strategy for the Management of Solid LLW from the Nuclear Industry [34]. VLLW (Low Volume) 9.8 Low volumes (‘dustbin loads’) of “radioactive waste which can be safely disposed of to an unspecified destination with municipal, commercial or industrial waste (“dustbin” disposal) if: each 0.1 m3 of waste contains less than 400 kBq of total activity or single items contain less than 40 kBq of total activity For wastes containing carbon-14 or hydrogen-3 (tritium):   in each 0.1 m3, the activity limit is 4,000 kBq for carbon-14 and hydrogen-3 (tritium) taken together; and for any single item, the activity limit is 400 kBq for carbon-14 and hydrogen-3 (tritium) taken together. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 25 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation 9.9 Controls on disposal of this material, after removal from the premises where the wastes arose, are not necessary.” VLLW (High Volume) 9.10 For bulk disposals – High Volume VLLW – where:   “Radioactive waste with maximum concentrations of four megabecquerels per tonne (MBq/te); or for waste containing hydrogen-3 (tritium), with maximum concentrations of 40 MBq/te; can be disposed of to specified landfill sites. 9.11 Controls on disposal of this material, after removal from the premises where the wastes arose, will be necessary in a manner specified by the environment regulators.” Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 26 of 27 Office for Nuclear Regulation APPENDIX B – GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR PASSIVE SAFETY 9.12 The following is a list of general principles taken from the SAPs [1] that should be considered in proposals developed by licensees.                The radioactivity should be immobilised; The wasteform and its container should be physically and chemically stable; Energy should be removed from the wasteform; A multibarrier approach should be adopted in ensuring containment; The wasteform and its container should be resistant to degradation; The storage environment should avoid degradation that may render the waste unsuitable for long-term management or disposal; The need for active safety systems to ensure safety should be minimised; The need for monitoring and maintenance to ensure safety should be minimised; The should be no need for prompt intervention to maintain the facility in a safe condition; The storage building should be resistant to foreseeable hazards; Access should be provided for response to incidents; The storage facility should be designed and operated so that individual packages can be inspected and retrieved within an appropriate period of time. This may include the need for reserve storage space; The lifetime of the storage building should be appropriate for the storage period prior to disposal; Appropriate provisions should be made for dealing with any radioactive waste or its packaging that shows signs of unacceptable behaviour; The package should be compatible with the long-term management strategy for the waste, which may include the need for a further period of storage, or disposal. Report : NS-TAST-GD-24 Revision 6 CM9 Ref.: 2019/254780 Page 27 of 27 cns-tast-gd-6.6.pdf
 Title of document OFFICIAL ONR GUIDE NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES Document Type: Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 Revision 0 Date Issued: Approved by: March 2017 Review Date: March 2020 David Pascoe Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19076. (2017/106085) Revision commentary: New document issued TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 6. DEFINITION OF A NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITE ...................................................... 3 7. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 4 8. NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES – GENERAL ............................................................. 5 9. SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS FOR A NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITE ...................... 6 10. LICENSED NUCLEAR SITE UNDER CONSTRUCTION .................................................... 8 11. MULTIPLE UNIT SITES .................................................................................................... 10 12. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 11 13. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 12 APPENDIX 1 – SUMMARY OF INDICATIVE MEASURES FOR NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES .................................................................................................. 13 APPENDIX 2 – SUMMARY OF INDICATIVE MEASURES FOR CIVIL LICENSED NUCLEAR SITES UNDER CONSTRUCTION SITES ....................................................... 15 1. © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 03/17 OFFICIAL Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION OFFICIAL 1.1 1.2 2.1 3.1 3.2 The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 7). This document contains Fundamental Security Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 1). The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security and Information Assurance documentation that helps them demonstrate ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in the exercise of their regulatory judgement during intervention activities relating to assessment of physical protection at nuclear construction sites. It aims to provide general advice and guidance to ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements. It does not prescribe the detail or methodologies for dutyholders to follow to demonstrate they have addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholders responsibility to determine and describe this detail within their submission and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies are required to protect SNI. ONR considers Physical Protection Systems (PPS) to be an important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance with relevant legislation. 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 4.1 The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 4) and the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 3). Further guidance is available within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 2 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 4.3 4.4 5.1 5.2 4.2 Fundamental Principle C of the CPPNM refers to the legislative and regulatory framework should provide for the establishment of applicable physical protection requirements and include a system of evaluation and licensing or other procedures to grant authorisation. The importance of issues relating to authorisation reiterated in the Nuclear Security Fundamentals, specifically:  Essential Element 3: Legislative and Regulatory Framework – 3.3 The legislative and regulatory framework, and associated administrative measures, to govern the nuclear security regime provides for the establishment of nuclear security regulations and requirements, and associated procedures for evaluating applications and granting authorisations or licences. A more detailed description of issues relating to legislative and regulatory frameworks is provided in Recommendations level guidance, specifically paragraphs 3.8 to 3.17 of Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5) (Reference 2). This document recommends that the State should licence activities or grant authorisation only when such activities comply with its physical protection regulations. The IAEA also publish Implementing Guide NSS No. 19 ‘Establishing the Nuclear Security Infrastructure for a Nuclear Power Programme’ (Reference 8) where further relevant information can be found on legislative and regulatory frameworks at paragraphs 3.1 to 3.12. 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements. This TAG provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 6.6 – Nuclear Construction Sites, in support of FSyP 6 – Physical Protection Systems. The TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 5) describes the Cabinet Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on and off nuclear premises. 5.3 The Classification Policy (Reference 6) indicates those categories of SNI, which require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 6. DEFINITION OF A NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITE 6.1 Section 77 of the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 (Reference 9), defines the term ‘Nuclear Construction Site’ as a site on which works are being carried out with a view to it becoming a nuclear site wholly or mainly for purposes other than defence purposes, which is situated within 5 kilometres of an existing nuclear site. NISR 2003 OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 3 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL further defines a ‘Nuclear Construction Site’ as one which works are being carried out by a developer pursuant to the grant or issue of a planning or development consent order. 7. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 7.1 Nuclear construction sites present unique challenges to security, not least the scale of some projects, extent of activity and numbers of personnel involved. All SyAPs and their associated TAGs will be relevant to nuclear construction site security at some stage and this TAG does not intend to reproduce the content of those TAGs. The aim of this TAG is to highlight to inspectors the differences a construction site has to an operational site to allow for proportionate assessment. It is a key principle that security measures are effective and proportionate to the threat, and inspectors should recognise that dutyholders need flexibility to manage changes to the construction process. Inspectors should be open to innovative proposals whilst ensuring risks are appropriately mitigated. 7.2 The following list of TAGs whilst not exhaustive, are particularly relevant to this TAG: Governance and Leadership Maintenance of a Robust Security Culture Commissioning of Security Systems Oversight of Suppliers of Items of Services of nuclear Security Categorisation for Theft Categorisation for Sabotage Physical Protection Design Adjacent and Enclave Sites Guidance on the Purpose, Scope and Quality of a Nuclear Site Security Plan 7.3 The purpose of the assessment is to determine whether the security arrangements on a Nuclear Construction Site are adequate to address three specific risks: The threat a Construction Site may pose to a neighbouring nuclear site The threat a Construction Site may pose to an existing operating nuclear site where a facility is being constructed The risk of sabotage through introducing defects into the new nuclear facility while it is under construction that could compromise the safety or security of the nuclear facility once it starts operations The assessment should also provide a level of confidence that the facility is being constructed to meet the arrangements that will be detailed in the security plan once the facility becomes operational using ‘secure by design’ principles. This document is not intended to provide guidance on the detailed design of security arrangements for the operating facility. It is produced to highlight areas for assessment consideration throughout the construction phase. 7.4 7.5 OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 4 of 17             Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL Regulatory Expectation 7.6 The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders demonstrate within their security plan how their physical protection system is phased according to sensitivity of the site as construction develops in order to provide ongoing assurance that its activities cannot be exploited by an adversary. FSyP 6 – Physical Protection System Nuclear Construction Sites SyDP 6.6 Dutyholders should ensure that they implement a physical protection system designed to ensure its activities cannot be exploited by an adversary to incorporate a latent defect or to pose a threat to an adjacent site. 8.1 8. NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES – GENERAL Phased Approach In order to provide for effective and proportionate security arrangements throughout the lifetime of the construction project, it is important that a phased approach is adopted. The phases should identify key points during the construction process when it is necessary to make incremental security enhancements to reflect the rise in the level of risk as the project progresses. Each phase should be documented in the Construction Site Security Plan (CSSP) together with the associated security arrangements clearly articulated. Security ‘hold points’ should be identified before progressing from one phase to the next to provide time to assess and/or approve amended or new versions of the security plan, and allow time for those revised arrangements to become embedded and operational with proven reliability prior to an increase in site sensitivity or categorisation. Examples of phases will be dependent on the function of the new facility, but may include: Ground Investigations. Preparatory Groundworks. First Nuclear Concrete.      Introduction of Nuclear or Other Radioactive Material. First Criticality. 8.2 8.3 Consideration should also be given to the proportionate arrangements for Temporary Security Plans (TSPs) during the transitional period without them placing an unnecessary burden on both dutyholder and regulator. This may be achieved by defining in the security plan the type of activity and bounding cases where TSPs are required. Coordination with Licence Application and Licence Grant The ONR publication ‘Licensing Nuclear Installations’ requires appropriate measures to be in place to manage all aspects of security before a site licence is granted. Inspectors will be required to assess the security measures in place and confirm they are appropriate. The dutyholder should submit a draft security plan at licence application and engage with ONR inspectors during its development to ensure it can OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 5 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL be approved. The approval in principle of the security plan prior to Site Licence Grant can be regarded as acceptance that ONR is satisfied with the security arrangements in place and a Site Licence can be granted. 8.4 The submission must include detail of the security architecture for end state operations. This provides assurance to ONR that there is a defined end state for the security regime and allows ONR to check that progress during the transitional period aligns with regulatory expectations and in accordance with agreed timescale. Changes to the end state security architecture will require submission of an amended or new issue of the plan for approval. Inspectors should consider:     Is the security phased in its approach to reflect the level of risk as the project progresses? Are there appropriate hold points identified between the phases? Are there appropriate provisions in place for engagement with the regulator to support achieving approval in principle of the security plan? Does the security plan include detail of the security architecture for site end state operations? 9. SECURITY ARRANGEMENTS FOR A NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITE 9.1 An approved security plan must be in place before a developer undertakes activities on a nuclear construction site to construct a new nuclear facility and for which Planning or Development Consent has been granted. The security plan for the construction phase should reflect the arrangements listed below. Security Appointments 9.2 A Company Security Manager should be appointed at the early stages of the project to develop security arrangements and author the security plan. A member of the dutyholder’s senior management team should be appointed to oversee the overall delivery of security. 9.3 9.4 A Site Security Manager or a Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) senior site manager should be appointed to act as a security focal point for liaison with the adjacent site and to oversee security force activity. Once appointed, the Construction Site Director should have clear sight of security measures being adopted, a clear understanding of the risks and have clear responsibilities for security governance. Liaison with Adjacent Site 9.5 Arrangements must be in place between the Security Manager and the adjacent nuclear site’s security manager to ensure there is a flow of information including activity on site, any potential hazards and reporting of security incidents for more information. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 6 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL Identification of Vulnerabilities and Hazards 9.6 Using the NIMCA as a basis, an evaluation of the vulnerabilities and hazards should be undertaken to ensure appropriate security arrangements are in place to mitigate the associated risks of construction projects. Examples of vulnerabilities may include heavy plant/vehicles, explosives and charges (used in geotechnical surveys), scaffolding, ladders, heavy tools, fuel and chemicals, and large mounds of spoil and earth. Example mitigation measures are at Appendix A. Access Control/Authorised Entry 9.7 The term Access Control is commonly used in relation to site or building access. It is likely that the initial stages of any development will be undertaken on open land where Public Rights of Way (PROW) are still in place and there may be no defined perimeter. In such cases, access to controllable areas and buildings should be strictly managed to mitigate any vulnerabilities that the dutyholder has identified. 9.8 9.9 Once PROW have been closed, a perimeter fence or barrier should be erected to delineate the boundary of the Nuclear Construction Site. Only authorised personnel and essential vehicles should be permitted access. Non- essential vehicles should be parked off the construction site and away from any adjacent Nuclear Site or Facility. Security Control Point 9.10 A Security Control Point should be established on the site at the designated vehicle/pedestrian access point. It should be staffed by security personnel and used to control and account for pedestrians/vehicles accessing and exiting from the construction site. This can act as a base from which security patrols are carried out and security documentation/records held. Searches 9.11 A facility should be provided to carry out searches of personnel and vehicles to minimise the risk of the introduction of prohibited items. Contractors Security Arrangements 9.12 Contracts with third parties should clearly stipulate the security arrangements that are required. Contractors are required to adhere to the same security arrangements as the dutyholder’s staff. Arrangements involving the submission of security plans by contactors to the dutyholder should be approved by the dutyholder’s Security Manager and supported by comprehensive audit and assurance arrangements. The use of such plans does not absolve the dutyholders from being responsible or accountable for security, and statements to that effect should be clearly articulated in the security plan. Personnel Security 9.13 Large scale construction projects present unique challenges for dutyholders due to the large workforce on site, the majority of whom will probably be contractors and sub- contractors, both long term and transient, employing a mixture of backgrounds and OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 7 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL nationalities. The level of vetting checks required for staff, contractors and visitors on a Nuclear Construction Site will depend on access requirements (e.g. to SNI, site plans and construction plant) and their roles, such as security and senior management positions. FSyP 8 requires dutyholders to deliver the appropriate combination of recruitment checks and vetting to satisfy themselves of the honesty and integrity of potential employees. 9.14 The dutyholder must have a clear personnel security strategy which reflects the phased approach where security arrangements are commensurate with the level of risk as the project progresses. Use of zones or compounds should be considered where access should be limited to those personnel with higher levels of vetting/security clearance. Security Culture 9.15 There may be particular challenges to fostering a good security culture amongst workers on a construction site due to the large numbers of people involved, the often transient nature of contractors and the limited exposure many will have had to nuclear security. The dutyholder should consider implementing a robust nuclear security culture from project start or implement a phased approach as the site develops. Inspectors should consider:          Is there a company security manager and a member of the senior management team appointed to oversee the delivery of security? Is there a Site Security Manager or SQEP senior manager appointed to act as the security focal point for liaison with the adjacent site and to oversee security force activity? Does the Construction Site Manager have a clear understanding of the risks and have clear responsibilities for security governance? Are there effective liaison arrangements in place with any adjacent nuclear premises? Has NIMCA been used as a basis for an evaluation of the vulnerabilities and hazards to ensure appropriate security arrangements are in place to mitigate the associated risks of construction projects? Are access control arrangements effective, incorporating a security control point and searching? Is there adequate control of the supply chain? Is there a clear and effective personnel security strategy? Is there an effective strategy in place to foster a strong security culture? 10. LICENSED NUCLEAR SITE UNDER CONSTRUCTION 10.1 The term ‘Licensed Nuclear Site Under Construction’ is used to describe a new site on which construction activity is being carried out, from the point at which a Nuclear Site OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 8 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL Licence is granted up to the time that the site is to become operational. A Licensed Nuclear Site Under Construction must have an approved NSSP in place. The NSSP is to build on the measures already detailed in the CSSP to address the threat to and from a neighbouring operating nuclear site. It is also required to address the risk of sabotage through maliciously introducing defects into the nuclear facility while it is being constructed that could compromise safety or security once operations start. 10.2 The dutyholder should submit a draft NSSP at licence application and engage with ONR inspectors during its development. The NSSP should reflect the phased approach to security arrangements throughout the project as described in para 8.1 above. The approval in principle of the NSSP prior to Site Licence Grant can be regarded as acceptance that ONR is satisfied with the security arrangements in place. The NSSP should also outline end state security requirements. These are the security standards, procedures and arrangements, including the location of buildings and barriers that must be in place before the site is formally categorised to the highest category for the prevention of theft or sabotage (refer to the PPS outcomes). Introduction of defects 10.3 The dutyholder should clearly identify the point at which the site is sufficiently developed to be vulnerable to the introduction of defects which may compromise the safety or security of the facility once it starts operating. Vulnerabilities should be clearly identified and appropriate security arrangements put in place to mitigate the risks. Introduction of Nuclear or Other Radioactive Material 10.4 As the project progresses there may be a requirement to introduce Nuclear Material (NM) and Other Radioactive Material (ORM) such as radioactive sources and new nuclear fuel before the facility becomes operational. The security arrangements to protect this material must achieve the required PPS outcome as detailed in the PPS Outcome Definition Table. Site Boundary 10.5 A permanent fence should be in place which delineates the site boundary and excludes any public rights of way. Serious Organised Crime and Police Act (SOCPA) 10.6 Once a Licence has been granted the site becomes a ‘designated site’ subject to the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act (SOCPA) 2005 s128 (Reference 10). Dutyholders are to demonstrate that enforcement of SOCPA can be implemented whenever necessary (e.g. the provision of a defined boundary, access control and clear signage). Inspectors should consider:   Does the security plan adopt the phased approach? Does the security plan outline the end-state security arrangements? OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 9 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL    Does the security plan identify the point at which the site is sufficiently developed to be vulnerable to the introduction of defects which may compromise the safety or security of the facility once it starts operating? Does the security plan demonstrate the required security outcome is achieved at all stages of project development, particularly as NM and ORM is brought on and the categorisation for theft and sabotage increases? Is there an appropriate site boundary in place that allows in enforcement of SOCPA once the licence is granted? 11. MULTIPLE UNIT SITES 11.1 New Nuclear Power Stations may consist of two or more operating reactors in close proximity to one another. The timeframe for operations may mean one or more units operating whilst others are still under construction. Security arrangements during this period must still achieve the appropriate PPS outcome for the operating reactor(s). Inspectors should be flexible and engage with dutyholders to ensure that security arrangements, some of which may be temporary, continue to achieve the appropriate PPS outcome. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 10 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation REFERENCES OFFICIAL 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003. Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13. Nuclear Security Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5). January 2011. www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf. IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20. Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s Nuclear Security Regime. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/3 16182/Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036 IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 14. Nuclear Security Recommendations on Radioactive Material and Associated Facilities. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1488_web.pdf The Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2001/24/pdfs/ukpga_20010024_en.pdf The Serious Organised Crime and Policing Act 2005. http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2005/15/pdfs/ukpga_20050015_en.pdf Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management System. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 11 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 13. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS CPPNM Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material Construction Site Security Plan Fundamental Security Principle International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions Nuclear Industries Security Regulations CSSP FSyP IAEA NIMCA NISR NM NSS NSSP ONR ORM PPS SIA SNI SPF SQEP SyDP TAG Nuclear Material Nuclear Security Series Nuclear Site Security Plan Office for Nuclear Regulation Other Radioactive Material Physical Protection System Security Industry Association Sensitive Nuclear Information Security Policy Framework Suitably Qualified and Experienced Security Delivery Principle Technical Assessment Guide PROW Public Right of Way SOCPA Serious Organised Crime and Policing Act OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 12 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 1. 2. APPENDIX 1 – SUMMARY OF INDICATIVE MEASURES FOR NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES The table below provides details on the most commonly deployed measures and processes to achieve the required security for a nuclear construction site. It is not an exhaustive list and dutyholders may consider other measures that achieve the required outcome. Each measure or process should be applied in a graduated manner according to the threat or risk being mitigated as the site develops. MEASURES AND PROCESS TABLE – NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES Measure or Process Description Prevent Unauthorised Access to equipment Initial stages - Site will not have a perimeter.  Account for all personnel on site.  Remove or secure all equipment and plant which pose a threat to the adjoining site(s) when not in use such as ladders, scaffolding, hazardous materi al in compounds, stores or I SO Containers.  Ensure keys are adequately secured an controlled  Clearly define any trespas s policy and how the compan y will deal with trespass and protest action  An inventory of equipment should be kept and frequent checks carried out  When Public Rights of Way are closed/re-routed, install a suitable fence to define the perimeter and provide for a defined site access/exit point(s)  Construction sites should not be used as storage areas when plant is not in use and the amount of pl ant on si te should be minimised. Plant and Vehicles  Designated compounds or parking areas, away from the adjacent site, should be used when plant is not in use.  Plant and vehicles should be immobilized when not in use.  Keys should be controlled and drawn on ly by authorised persons OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 13 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL MEASURES AND PROCESS TABLE – NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES Measure or Process Description Spoil  Extensive excavation work will result in large quantities of spoil. A plan should be i n place to address the impact of spoil mounds on security measures facilitating an attack or the conduct of hostile reconnaissance on an ad jacent operating facility, or circumvent security measures Liaison with other adjacent Site  Ensure formal liais on takes place with security staff from adjacent sites and stakeholders such as CNC and Home Office Police force CTSAs.  Appropriate arrangements should be in place to report security incidents to the company security manager and adjac ent nuclear site’s security staff on a 24/7 basis  Ensure clear zones are maintained around site and adjacent Maintain Clear Zones sites  Ensure non-essential vehicles are parked off-site and well away from any adjoining nuclear facility. Guarding/Security Force Prevent prohibited items being introduced to site Contingency Plans  A SQEP security force shoul d be in place. Duties should be clearly documented. Where CGF are employed, contracts should include a set of key performance indicators.  Contract guards must be SIA Licence holders.  A Security Control Point should be located by the access point.  Random searches of personnel/vehicles entering site should be carried out to achieve the specified security outcome.  Contingency plans should document actions to be taken if a security event, including protest, action takes place. This should include communication with CNC, local police and adjacent sites Personnel Security checks  Clear policy should document the requirements for background OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 14 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL APPENDIX 2 – SUMMARY OF INDICATIVE MEASURES FOR CIVIL LICENSED NUCLEAR SITES UNDER CONSTRUCTION SITES A Civil Licensed Nuclear Site Under Construction must have an approved Nuclear Site Security Plan. The plan may be a simple transition from the Construction Site Security Plan, but a phased approach should be adopted. The NSSP relating to the operational site should reflect the appropriate PPS outcome and the relevant TAGs should be referred to. Similarly, the relevant PPS outcomes must be achieved from the point at which NM and/or ORM is introduced to the licensed site. 1. MEASURES AND PROCESS TABLE – CIVIL LICENSED NUCLEAR CONSTRUCTION SITES Measure or Process Description Prevent Unauthorised access to Site Contingency Plans Prevent unauthorised access/use of equipment  Ensure a site perimeter is in place, all PROW are closed and clear zones are in place around perimeter.  All personnel entering site are aut horised through checks by guard force or use of AACS  Vehicle access limited to essential vehicles and minimised with the use of off-site delivery points.  Vehicles are searched on entry  The dutyholder is to ensure appropriate contingency plans are in place to assist i n countering relevant malicious capabilities. These should be consistent with emergency arrangements. In particular, dutyholders should recognise the potential increase in threat from protestor action.  Plant/vehicles should be i mmobilised and cabs should be secured when unoccupied.  Use of PIN protected control systems should be considered.  Vehicles should be parked in designated positions away from adjacent or sensitive areas.  Consider use of Vehicle alarms/tracking systems  Secure Compounds/ISO Containers used for ladders, scaffolds, hazardous materials etc.  Ensure there is an i nventory of plant, equipment, volatile materials and that random checks are carried out on them.  Keys should be held securely and accounted for at all times.  Access controls should prevent unauthorised persons accessing equipment or plant. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 15 of 17       Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL SOCPA is very specific on what parts of a licensed site are covered as detailed below: all ground inside the outer perimeter of the protection required for any premises, defined as the line of the outermost fences, walls or other obstacles provided or relied upon for protecting those premises from intruders; and that line shall be determined on the assumption that every gate, door or other barrier across a way through a fence, wall or other obstacle is closed. How this is managed is a matter for dutyholders, however as a minimum the following is to be achieved: SOCPA Provisions  warning signs are displayed aroun d the outer perimeter to ensure all possible approach route s are adequately covered, especially those that adjoin public property and rights of way;  wherever possible, signs are located so they can also be read during the hours of darkness; signs are made and, where pract icable, positioned in such a way that reduces the possibility of them being used as climbing aids, but ensures that they are securely attached to a fence; signs are positioned so that, wherever possible, lines of sight/vision through a fence are kept clear; sufficient spare signs are held to replace any lost or damaged; and, procedures are in place to liaise with civil police.  Arrangements should be in place to secure the bas e of a Tower Crane effectively.  The span of the crane should not compro mise security of an  On a multi-unit NPS, construction requiring tower c ranes should be comp leted before any adj acent unit operations commence.  As the build progresses , the complexity of structures will increase. To minimise the risk of unauthorised i tems being introduced, dutyholders should have a plan that c overs the security of voids in structures. This should include a means of searching then securing voids.  Zoning of sites to protect critical infrastructure. Tower Cranes adjacent site or operating reactor’s perimeter. Void Management OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 16 of 17 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL Construction sites may cover a wide area several times the size of the eventual operating site. Electronic security arrangements such as PIDS, CCTV, AACS a nd lighting should be considered and deployed as is practicable. When identifying vulnerabilities, dutyholders should have prioritised where the deployment of such systems will be most effective. The following should be taken into account:  Sites may not ha ve an electric ity supply, therefore equipment with self-contained power sources – diesel generators, battery supplies, solar and wind powered should be considered. Technical Security Measures  The continuous development of the site should be taken into account and portable security systems may need to be considered.  Site activities should be taken into account with regard to cable laying, particularly when heavy pl ant is moving and excavations are underway. Con sideration may be given to alternative transmission systems such as wireless technology.  Where PIDS/IDS are used, there s hould be a suitable means of verification/assessment in place.  An OR1 and OR2 should be completed to determine what security measures are needed and to what effect. OFFICIAL Report CNS-TAST-GD-6.6 TRIM Ref: 2017/106085 Page 17 of 17 ns-tast-gd-048.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE Organisational Change Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 Date Issued: September 2018 Review Date: September 2021 Approved by: Stuart Allen Professional Lead – Human and Organisational Capability Record Reference: TRIM Folder 1.1.3.776. (2018/283567) Revision commentary: Fit for purpose update TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 2 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED ............................................................................................... 3 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 5 6. APPENDICES .................................................................................................................... 17 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2018 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 09/18 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) MS.1 to MS.4 which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of the organisational capability of potential and existing licensees. The principles presented in these SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgments and decisions. This technical assessment guide is one of those guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE The purpose of this Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is to assist in making informed judgements and decisions on the adequacy of the licensee’s arrangements and their implementation, to ensure that changes to organisational structure or resources which may affect safety are adequately controlled in accordance with the requirement of nuclear site licence condition (LC) 36 ‘Organisational Capability’ as set out in Appendix Appendix 4 of this TAG also provides guidance on how Inspectors should approach the revised clause in LC 36(1), added in 2011, which requires licensees to provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources to fulfil their obligations in respect of nuclear safety. The revised LC 36(1) was introduced, together with amendments to LC 17 ‘Management Systems’, to ensure that the Nuclear Safety Directive 2009/71/Euratom (NSD) is fully implemented in Great Britain. It incorporates guidance for inspectors in judging the adequacy with which licensees’ arrangements have been implemented, originally presented in T/INS/036 ‘LC36 Control of Organisational Change’, thus consolidating related guidance within this single reference document. Factors that the inspector may wish to consider concerning the way in which a licensee’s arrangements are implemented are set out in Appendix 5. ONR guidance on assessing arrangements to provide and maintain adequate human resources is presented in NS-TAST-GD-065 ‘Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline’. Together, these guides provide comprehensive advice to inspectors on the requirements of LC36, as such they should be considered in combination when judging the adequacy of a licensee’s arrangements for LC36. The nuclear industry Safety Directors’ Forum (nuclearinst.com/Safety-Directors-Forum) has also published a Good Practice Guide (GPG) ‘Nuclear Baseline and the Management of Organisational Change – A Good Practice Guide’, with the cooperation of ONR. This guidance should be considered as relevant good practice and inspectors should encourage licensees to be familiar with it, and use it, where appropriate. Where licensees are able to demonstrate that their arrangements are consistent with the guidance in the GPG, inspectors should regard this as meeting the expectations of this TAG and sufficient for compliance with LC 36(2) and LC 36(5). 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION The following UK legal and other requirements are applicable to this TAG: 3.1 The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations  regulations describe employers’ These the requirements for control and co-operation with outside undertakings, together with appropriate arrangements for effective planning, organisation, control, monitoring and review. In particular, Regulation 13 requires employers to take into account employees’ capabilities as regards health and safety when entrusting tasks to employees. responsibilities, addressing Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 2 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3.2 Nuclear Site Licence Conditions The following site licence conditions are of particular relevance to this TAG:      LC 6 – Documents, Records, Authorities and Certificates. The licensee shall make adequate records to demonstrate compliance with any of the conditions attached to the nuclear site licence. The licensee’s management of change arrangements should include provision for the identification and management of records arising from implementation of the arrangements. LC12 – Duly Authorised and Other Suitably Qualified and Experienced Persons. The licensee shall make and implement adequate arrangements to ensure that only suitably qualified and experienced persons perform any duties which may affect the safety of operations on the site. Persons fulfilling management of organisational change roles, as roles which may affect the safety of operations, must be suitably qualified and experienced to fulfil those roles. LC 17 – Management Systems. The licensee shall establish and implement adequate quality management arrangements in respect of all matters which may affect safety. Management of change arrangements should be an integral part of the licensee’s management system. LC 26 – Control and Supervision of Operations. The licensee shall ensure that no operations are carried out which may affect safety except under the control and supervision of suitably qualified and experienced persons appointed for that purpose by the licensee. Persons fulfilling management of change roles, as roles which may affect the safety of operations, should be SQEP. LC 36 – Organisational Capability. The licensee shall provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources to ensure the safe operation of the licensed site, and make and implement arrangements to control any change to its organisational structure or resources which may affect safety. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ADDRESSED Safety Assessment Principles The Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities (2014 Edition, Revision 0) provide a framework to guide regulatory decision making in the nuclear permissioning process. They are supported by Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) which further aid the decision-making process. The following principles are of particular relevance to this TAG:  MS.1 – Leadership. Identifies the need for oversight of nuclear safety performance and a Management System.  MS.2 – Capable Organisation. Identifies the need for changes to the organisation to be systematically evaluated to ensure that they do not adversely affect nuclear safety management capabilities.  MS.3 – Decision Making. Identifies the need for decision making to be based on processes that ensure the conflict between nuclear safety and other business goals, including commercial and schedule pressures and external influences, are recognised and resolved.  MS.4 – Learning. Identifies the need for lessons to be learned from internal leadership, organisational and external sources capability, safety decision making and safety performance, to continually improve 4. 4.1 Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 3 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation Technical Assessment Guides (TAGs) 4.2 The following Technical Assessment Guides are applicable to this TAG:  NS-TAST-GD-027 – Training and Assuring Personnel Competence This TAG addresses the means by which the licensee demonstrates that it has a systematic approach to identification and delivery of personnel competence and for assuring personnel competence. training processes and arrangements its  NS-TAST-GD-049 – Licensee Core and Intelligent Customer Capabilities This TAG addresses the means by which the licensee demonstrates that it has sufficient in-house expertise to maintain control and oversight of nuclear safety at all times, and the use and oversight of contractors whose work has the potential to impact on nuclear safety  NS-TAST-GD-050 – Periodic Safety Reviews This TAG expects a Periodic Safety Review (PSR) to review changes to the licensee’s organisational structure and resources to consider their cumulative impact and to determine if the current position is adequate for continued safe operation of the plant or site  NS-TAST-GD-065 – Function and Content of the Nuclear Baseline This TAG addresses the means by which the licensee demonstrates that its organisational structure, staffing and competencies are, and remain, suitable and sufficient to manage nuclear safety throughout the full range of the Licensee’s business. It provides the foundation from which organisational changes can be assessed.  NS-TAST-GD-061 – Staffing Levels and Task Organisation This TAG provides detailed guidance to support the assessment of the approaches and methods used by applicants and licensees to derive, validate and monitor staffing arrangements; and to specify task organisation, in particular, the design of shift work systems and team design. NS-TAST-GD-072 – Function and Content of a Safety Management Prospectus Element 4 of this TAG requires a licensee to have adequate structures and resources to meet the nuclear safety needs of the business. WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels 4.3 The objective of The Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) is to develop a common approach to nuclear safety in Europe by comparing national approaches to the application of International Atomic Energy Authority (IAEA) safety standards. The reference levels in the following harmonisation issues represent good practices in the WENRA member states, are relevant, and should be taken into account by the Inspector: Issue B: Operating Organisation - Organisational Structure. Identifies the need for the adequacy of the organisational structure to be assessed when organisational changes are made, and for changes to be justified in advance, carefully planned, and evaluated after implementation. Issue C: Management System - Objectives. Identifies the need for the management system to achieve and enhance nuclear safety by ensuring that other demands on the licensee are not considered separately from nuclear safety requirements. IAEA Safety Standards Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 4 of 25    Office for Nuclear Regulation 4.4 The IAEA Safety Standards (Requirements and Guides) were the benchmark for revision of the SAPs in 2014 and are recognised by ONR as relevant good practice. They should therefore be consulted, where relevant, by the inspector, although it should be appreciated that they are design standards rather than regulatory standards. The Safety Requirements publication GSR Part 2 ‘Leadership and Management for Safety’ (IAEA 2016) is relevant. It defines the requirements for establishing, assessing, sustaining and continuously improving leadership and management for safety in organisations. Requirement 9 focuses on provision of resources and requirement 12 focuses on fostering a culture for safety. 4.5 GSR Part 2 requires that: Provision is made in the management system to identify any changes (including organisational changes) that could have significant implications for safety and to ensure that they are appropriately analysed; and Planned reviews of the management system take account of changes in the organisation. 4.6 The following reports produced by IAEA are also directly relevant: INSAG 18 – Managing Change in the Nuclear Industry: The Effects on Safety. This report discusses how and why change can challenge the maintenance of high levels of safety, and what can be done to control that challenge and reap all the benefits of change. IAEA Safety Guide GS-G-3.1 and GS-G-3.5 – Application of the Management System for Facilities and Activities and The Management System for Nuclear Installations These documents provide generic guidance to aid in establishing, implementing, assessing and continually improving a management system.     5. 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 ADVICE TO INSPECTORS Background LC 36(1), which was introduced by a variation to all extant nuclear site licences in July 2011, requires the licensee to provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources. Appendix 4 provides guidance to inspectors on the approach that should be taken to assessing the financial resources aspects of this requirement. However, when this variation was introduced, ONR advised that it considered that existing licensees would already comply with the requirement to provide and maintain adequate human resources, by virtue of their Nuclear Baseline. NS-TAST-GD-065 ‘Function and Content of a Nuclear Baseline’ sets out ONR’s expectations that a licensee should have a nuclear baseline to provide a demonstration that it has suitable and sufficient organisational structures, staffing and competences in place to effectively and reliably carry out those activities which could impact on nuclear safety. NS-TAST-GD-065, supplemented by other guidance such as NS-TAST-GD-027 ‘Training and Assuring Personnel Competence’, is therefore instrumental in setting out ONR’s expectations of the way in which a licensee shows that it has, and maintains, adequate human resources. The nuclear baseline also provides a clear description of the currently intended staffing levels as a reference point or ‘baseline’ against which Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 5 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.9 5.10 5.11 the licensee can assess the potential impact on nuclear safety of proposed organisational changes, noting that it will also be affected by changes in business objectives such as lifetime extensions. LC 36(2) requires the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements to control any change to its organisational structure or resources which may affect safety. Appendix 1 states the licence condition in full. ONR interprets this condition to relate specifically to nuclear safety although licensees may wish to apply similar arrangements to manage changes affecting industrial safety, security, environmental matters or other parts of their business. The licensee’s management of change arrangements should ensure that the nuclear safety implications of a proposed change are fully considered and that risks arising from inadequate assessment and implementation of the change are recognised and suitably controlled. These arrangements should be part of a licensee’s management system. There are many drivers for organisational change and, without formal change management, a licensee may not immediately recognise the implications of a proposed course of action. Examples of drivers for organisational change and their potential implications are given in Appendix 2. It is important that the full implications of a proposed change or a series of changes are assessed prior to implementation of the change(s). This is to guard against a failure to consider all relevant factors and potential dependencies between related changes, and the potential for 'salami slicing' in which a major change is decomposed into a series of lesser changes which are treated independently. This applies to changes at all levels in the organisation including the very top of the organisation i.e. the Board or Executive team, where changes in the composition and knowledge of either of these teams can have a potentially significant influence over nuclear safety. Changes should be classified according to nuclear safety significance. Broad guidance for inspectors on the classification of organisational changes is given in Appendix 3. The level of assessment required should be proportionate to the potential nuclear safety significance of the change. It should be noted that replacing one post holder with another post holder on a like-for- like basis need not constitute a trigger for the application of management of change arrangements as this should ordinarily be addressed through the licensee’s arrangements made under LC 12. However, where a number of changes are to be undertaken in the same area or there is a consequential effect on roles and responsibilities, the arrangements should be applied. In addition to this TAG and NS-TAST-GD-065, inspectors should be familiar with the nuclear industry GPG on ‘Nuclear Baseline and the Management of Organisational Change. This guidance was produced, and is maintained, by an industry working group that includes ONR. Where licensees are able to demonstrate that their arrangements are consistent with the guidance in the GPG, inspectors should regard this as meeting the expectations of this TAG and sufficient for compliance with the Licence Condition. The GPG is available on the website of the Safety Director’s Forum (nuclearinst.com/Safety-Directors-Forum). 5.12 For new build organisations, it is important that management of change arrangements are fully developed and implemented in sufficient time to allow an adequate period of demonstrated working, usually in the region of 12 months prior to the Nuclear Site Licensing (NSL) decision. It is recognised that new build organisations develop rapidly during the pre-application and early NSL assessment phase of the project. However, implementation of these arrangements should enable an organisation to establish and Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 6 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation demonstrate the appropriate level of control, while supporting the development of the company’s resourcing strategy. This should enabling ONR to gain confidence in the company’s approach to building a nuclear competent organisation. 5.13 ONR recognises that, unlike mature licensee organisations, a new build organisation may not be ‘right first time’ and will continue to evolve, particularly during the early stages of a new build project. The organisation should ensure that its management of change arrangements are proportionate to the phase of the project and sufficiently flexible to enable rather than constrain organisational development. 5.14 ONR acknowledges that for low hazard sites, typically those below the REPPIR threshold, it may be proportionate for a simplified management of change process to be applied. It is however still important that an adequate risk assessment is undertaken for organisational changes on these lower hazard sites to ensure the organisational capability is suitable to manage nuclear safety. It is particularly important that a proportionate process allowing flexibility is developed to manage staff reduction prior to entry of a site into care and maintenance. ONR Permissioning of Organisational Change 5.15 To introduce flexibility into the permissioning process, licensees may prescribe, with ONR agreement ‘derived’ powers for use by ONR usually but not exclusively when permissioning the highest category of change proposal. The ‘derived’ powers defined in a licensee’s LC 36 arrangements may include agreement, notification, acknowledgement and specification but not approval, consent or direction. However, derived powers have no formal legal basis and constitute administrative arrangements agreed between ONR and the licensee. Inspectors should note that inclusion of derived powers are not a prerequisite for the licensee’s LC 36 arrangements to be considered as adequate, nor does their use preclude the use of primary powers to exercise regulatory control over modifications. This guidance provides advice to inspectors on ONR’s expectations for adequate licensee arrangements required under LC36 (2). 5.16 The licensee’s arrangements may also include provision for enhanced implementation monitoring and control of a proposed organisational change by ONR, where ONR considers that the use of primary or derived power Licence Instruments may not be appropriate or proportionate to exercise regulatory control and oversight of a licensee’s modification proposal. Where this is the case, the inspector should check that such arrangements are consistent with the expectations set out in NS-PER-GD-001 Revision 2. 5.17 This guidance provides advice to inspectors on ONR’s expectations for adequate licensee arrangements required under LC36 (2). Management of Change Principles 5.18 There are some broad principles which underpin ONR’s expectations of a licensee’s management of change arrangements. These are set out below and then each principle is discussed in more detail in the following sections. 1. 2. The arrangements should be robust, incorporated as part of the licensee’s management system and applied to all activities that have the potential to impact on nuclear safety; The Board of the licensee/Executive should own and support the management of change arrangements and ensure that they are embedded throughout the organisation; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 7 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3. 4. 5. 6. The arrangements should reference the nuclear baseline and include a process for updating it on a regular basis; The arrangements should include an initial screening assessment to identify the potential safety significance of a change proposal and establish a suitable categorisation for determining the level of analysis, justification and challenge; The licensee should assess and justify the safety of a proposed change, commensurate with its unmitigated potential impact on safety should the change be inadequately conceived or executed, identify and implement suitable controls to ensure nuclear safety is not adversely affected and monitor the implementation of the change. The licensee should periodically review the effectiveness of the overall arrangements and the changes that have been implemented. Principle 1 A licensee’s management of change arrangements should be robust, incorporated as part of the management system and applied to all activities that have the potential to impact on nuclear safety. 5.19 The licensee should have formal, systematic arrangements in place to assess, monitor and review organisational changes to ensure that they are managed in a co-ordinated, consistent and effective manner. These arrangements should be owned and supported by the licensee Board/Executive. 5.20 These arrangements, which may under primary powers be approved by ONR, should be part of the licensee’s management system, and ideally be integrated with the organisation’s HR processes rather than being separate and additional. This also means that the resource implications of change can be considered as part of the overall management of the organisation and its capabilities. They should set out the roles and responsibilities for managing changes with clearly assigned responsibilities for originating, peer review, approval, monitoring, close-out of individual changes and post change reviews. 5.21 The scope of the licensee’s arrangements should include all organisational changes that could potentially affect nuclear safety, not just roles and posts included in the nuclear baseline. The licensee needs to be able to demonstrate through a proportionate application of its arrangements that it can influence or mitigate the impact of such changes so that nuclear safety is not compromised. This may, for example, include the impact on the licensee of proposed actions or decisions made by parent companies or Parent Body Organisations where these could impact on the licensee’s capability or its management of nuclear safety. The licensee should also consider the potential effects on culture and morale arising from the change. 5.22 The scope of the arrangements should also include important enabling and support functions such as human resources, finance and procurement where these have the potential either directly, or through consequential change, to impact on the licensee’s management of nuclear safety. 5.23 The arrangements should allow for use of the management of change process as a flexible risk assessment tool where appropriate. Examples of when this might be necessary include long-term absences and long-standing vacancies. The default assumption should be that all posts and changes have the potential to affect safety management unless it can be demonstrated otherwise. 5.24 Proposed changes should be assessed using a consistent methodology. The methodology should be applied to all proposed changes in order to make and record an early judgement of the potential impact on nuclear safety. ONR’s expectations of a methodology are set out in Principles 4 and 5. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 8 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.25 Staff involved in ensuring or assuring the quality of management of change proposals should be suitably qualified and experienced persons (SQEP) to do so and SQEP requirements for staff fulfilling key roles within the arrangements should be clearly defined. The importance of SQEP input to a management of change assessment cannot be over emphasised as staff experienced in the management of change process can apply that experience and judgement to avoid the potential pitfalls that less experienced staff may not be aware of. 5.26 Staff implementing LC36 arrangements should be given specific training in MOC theory and principles as well as the licensee’s arrangements. They should not be deemed to be competent on the basis of seniority. 5.27 The arrangements should ensure that individual change proposals are clearly identified and that details of the change i.e. change category and other important attributes are recorded in a change register. Documentation used to assess, decide upon, monitor, review and close-out the change should be retained for current and future reference in accordance with the licensee’s arrangements under LC 6. ‘Documents, Records, Authorities and Certificates’. 5.28 The arrangements should consider and, where possible, allow for the reversibility of changes or the application of contingency plans should subsequent performance monitoring indicate that the change has been inappropriately conceived or inadequately implemented. The extent of the reversibility may be related to the significance of the change and the availability of effective countermeasures. For larger, more significant changes, consideration should also be given to the options for how the objectives of the change can be achieved, including a justification of the chosen option. The development of a communications plan should also be considered. 5.29 All change proposals should be subject to a proportionate level of scrutiny and challenge, analogous to expectations for modifications to existing plant made under LC 22 ‘Modification or Experimentation on Existing Plant’. The level of scrutiny is likely to increase with potential significance. Where the safety significance of a proposed change is judged to be high, the arrangements should provide for seeking advice from the NSC (or identified equivalent status body where appropriate), and senior management oversight of the effectiveness of the process and implementation of individual changes. 5.30 The licensee’s arrangements should require approval to be formally granted by a SQEP prior to implementation of a change subject to satisfactory confirmation that any enabling actions have been completed, and for the change to be formally signed off on completion. 5.31 The effectiveness of implementation of the arrangements should be routinely monitored and reviewed as part of the licensee’s normal assurance processes. 5.32 The inspector should consider whether or not:    The licensee has formal, documented management of change arrangements which are an integral part of its management system; It is clear that the arrangements apply to all aspects of the licensee’s activities, including changes at Board or Executive team level, that have the potential to affect nuclear safety, and have they been promulgated to all parts of the licensee’s organisation; The documented arrangements are clear, available to end users and up to date;  The arrangements use a methodology which is easy to understand and follow; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 9 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation       The methodology is being consistently interpreted and applied across the licensee organisation; Roles and responsibilities for implementing the management of change arrangements are clearly defined, integrated with the management system and understood by staff with management of change process roles; SQEP requirements for staff fulfilling key roles within the arrangements are clearly defined; Staff fulfilling key management of change arrangements are demonstrably SQEP for those roles and they have a suitable level of authority within the licensee’s organisation; All change proposals are logged in a change register and records are available to substantiate the key decisions made in support of significant changes in accordance with the licensee’s arrangements for LC 6; The arrangements are subject to the processes of independent review and audit operated by the licensee. Principle 2 the The Board of management of change arrangements and ensure that they are embedded throughout the organisation. licensee/Executive should own and support the 5.33 A licensee’s management of change arrangements should be peer reviewed and implemented consistently and effectively, and a visible commitment to these arrangements should be made by the licensee Board/Executive. The Board/Executive should be able to show that it actively uses the MOC arrangements and supports the management of change process by regularly reinforcing to the workforce the importance of having and following a robust change process. 5.34 The Board/Executive should ensure that SQEP resources are put in place to develop the management of change arrangements, to implement them and to maintain oversight of the way in which the arrangements are used. This should include provision for suitable levels of challenge and independent peer review of change proposals as part of the licensee’s corporate governance arrangements, and for seeking advice from the Nuclear Safety Committee or identified equivalent status body where appropriate. 5.35 The management of change arrangements should apply throughout the company, up to and including the Executive team and Board, noting that strategic and complex changes to the structure or staff composition of a business may often originate at this level. 5.36 Progress with, and the effectiveness of, the implementation of significant, complex changes should be regularly monitored by the Board/Executive. The Board/Executive should establish an oversight process for this purpose as appropriate. 5.37 It is expected that the licensee Board/Executive will proactively discuss significant, complex changes with ONR at an early stage. This will allow the licensee to share its intentions with ONR and for ONR to provide advice and guidance as appropriate. It will also help ONR to understand the licensee’s business drivers and to schedule and prioritise its own resources as appropriate. 5.38 The Board/Executive should satisfy itself that management of change arrangements are embedded throughout the organisation and that suitable provision is made to periodically review the effectiveness of the arrangements, and to monitor the cumulative effects of changes on the overall health of the licensee organisation. It Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 10 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation should ensure that the reasons for, and progress with, significant, complex changes are communicated to the workforce. 5.39 The inspector should consider whether or not:         The Board and Executive are able to demonstrate their commitment to effective management of organisational change; The Board and Executive has regularly satisfied itself that the management of change arrangements are adequate and that they are being implemented effectively; There is a governance process that ensures appropriate oversight of, and challenge to, all proposed changes; The Board/Executive is involved in assessing the implications of changes which may have a greater potential impact on nuclear safety as part of the licensee’s governance arrangements; The Board/Executive is aware of the need to discuss more significant, complex changes with ONR at an early stage; The licensee’s governance arrangements provide for an oversight process to monitor implementation and provide strategic guidance and support for more significant changes; The Board/Executive regularly seeks assurance that implementation of more significant and complex changes is proceeding satisfactorily; The licensee’s communication arrangements adequately convey the reasons for, and progress with, implementation of significant changes to the workforce. Principle 3 A licensee’s management of change arrangements should reference the nuclear baseline and include a process for updating it on a regular basis. 5.40 A licensee should have a nuclear baseline which provides a demonstration that it has suitable and sufficient organisation structures, staffing and competences in place to effectively and reliably carry out those activities which could impact on nuclear safety. 5.41 The nuclear baseline should act as a reference point or ‘baseline’ against which the licensee can assess the potential impact on nuclear safety of proposed organisational changes. Individual change assessments should reference the baseline where the proposed change is likely to have an impact on it. 5.42 The baseline should be dynamic and updated as changes are made to the organisational structure and resources, and periodically reviewed to consolidate changes. 5.43 The nuclear baseline should be used as an integral part of the licensees resourcing processes. 5.44 The inspector should consider whether or not:  The baseline is up to date and reflective of the licensee’s current organisation;  Management of change assessments include a reference to the nuclear baseline and identify whether or not the proposed changes affect baseline roles;  The nuclear baseline is regularly reviewed to ensure that it is up to date and incorporates changes affecting baseline roles; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 11 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation      The management of change arrangements take account of the cumulative effects of low category changes on the nuclear baseline; The management of change arrangements vulnerabilities when completing the risk assessment of the change; take account of baseline The management of change arrangements are integrated with human resource processes; There is evidence that the resource implications of proposed changes are shared with human resources as part of the change assessment process; Resource actions arising from individual management of change assessments have been closed and, if not, that unresolved actions are being managed. Principle 4 A licensee’s management of change arrangements should include an initial screening assessment to identify the potential safety significance of a change proposal and establish a suitable categorisation for determining the level of analysis, justification and challenge. 5.45 It is important that a proposed change is assessed prior to implementation to ensure that the implications of the change are fully understood. The assessment can be considered as an organisational risk assessment which identifies the potential risks associated with the proposed change, including risks arising both from the outcome of a proposed change and the process of transition. 5.46 The licensee’s management of change arrangements should include provision for an initial screening assessment to identify the potential nuclear safety significance of a proposed change in the event that the change is inadequately conceived or executed. The output of this assessment should be used to inform the classification of the change (as required by LC 36 (5)) which in turn is related to the level of analysis, justification and scrutiny that the licensee gives to the change proposal. The screening assessment should be formally recorded in a management of change register once internal licensee approval to further develop the proposal has been gained. 5.47 Change classification or categorisation methodology should consider the risks associated with the change being inadequately conceived or executed, and should not take planned mitigation into account. ONR expects the change classification or category of all changes to be independently challenged prior to implementation proportionally. 5.48 ONR normally expects the number of change proposals which fall into the top category to be relatively few. These ordinarily include proposals which constitute wholesale organisational change or which potentially challenge the basis upon which the licence was granted. Licensees usually have three further categories of change proposal for less significant changes. Broad guidance on classification of organisational changes is given in Appendix 3 for illustrative purposes, and there is guidance in the GPG. 5.49 The licensee’s arrangements should make appropriate provision for engaging ONR and, in the case of significant or complex changes, early engagement. This will allow ONR to provide advice and guidance to the licensee as appropriate and should simplify ONR permissioning of such changes since it will have prior knowledge of the rationale for the change and gained confidence in the licensee’s approach to assessing the implications of the change. This early engagement is particularly important in a number of cases, for example where a licensee is planning to reduce staff numbers through a redundancy programme where a statutory consultation period may apply. ONR will expect engagement to have commenced before the statutory consultation period is invoked. Further examples include where significant change is planned to the management of the organisation. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 12 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.50 ONR expects:   The licensee’s arrangements to affirm that Category 1 changes shall not proceed without the formal agreement of ONR and for such changes to be submitted in writing to ONR in accordance with LC 36 (5). In such circumstances it is prudent for the licensee to ensure that sufficient time is built into the change programme to provide for ONR assessment of the proposed change. The licensee should facilitate this through early engagement with ONR so that the level of regulatory interest can be established and resources can be put in place to assess the change. The licensee’s arrangements for Category 2 change proposals should require the change to be submitted in writing to ONR a suitable period before the proposed implementation date. This is at least 20 working days. If, during this period, ONR informs the licensee in writing that ONR wishes to review the proposal before it proceeds, the licensee’s arrangements should confirm that the change will not proceed until ONR agreement is obtained. It is, again, clearly in the licensee’s interests to give ONR early notice of Category 2 changes where possible so that any potential issues can be discussed and resolved without undue impact on the licensee’s programme or a need to invoke the derived power in the licensee’s arrangements. Where ONR does not intend to exercise the derived power and permission the change, ONR should formally communicate this to the licensee in writing so that it may proceed with the proposed change earlier if it chooses. The basis for ONR’s decision not to exercise the derived power should be documented.  Category 3 and 4 changes should be entered into the licensee’s management of change register which should be available for periodic sampling by the inspector. If ONR informs the licensee in writing that ONR wishes to review the proposal before it proceeds, the licensee’s arrangements should confirm that the change will not proceed until ONR agreement is obtained. 5.51 Where an agreement, in accordance with the licensee’s own arrangements, is needed from ONR to allow a proposed change to proceed, the inspector should arrange for the change to be formally assessed, and a Project Assessment Report (PAR) produced, in accordance with ONR’s permissioning procedure. Once ONR is satisfied that the change may proceed, a Licence Instrument will be issued to the licensee to permission the change. 5.52 Application of the classification methodology and implementation of management of change arrangements should not allow changes, which if assessed in totality could constitute a Category 1 or 2 change, to be reduced to a number of smaller, lower significance changes i.e. the arrangements should not allow ‘salami slicing’. 5.53 Over time, and with experience, a licensee may develop an appreciation of the likely category for individual changes and will form a view based on an initial, informal assessment. This initial assessment should not be used in place of a comprehensive assessment for significant changes, nor should the change originator pre-judge the categorisation of a change without an appropriate assessment of the implications of the change. 5.54 Some changes may be borderline between two classifications or categories. In these situations ONR expects the licensee to take a conservative position and consider the change at the higher level. Some changes may attract key stakeholder interest. In these situations ONR expects the change to be categorised in accordance with the licensee’s arrangements. Occasionally a higher level of scrutiny can be applied; this will be viewed positively but is not expected to be normally adopted. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 13 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.55 The inspector should consider whether or not:           An initial screening assessment has been prepared to identify the potential impact of the change proposal on nuclear safety significance and categorise the proposal; The risk assessment uses a clear, consistent and well-informed approach which identifies potential risks arising both from the final outcome of the change and the process of transition; The classification methodology is easy to understand and is being applied objectively and consistently, throughout the licensee’s organisation; There is a checking process to confirm that changes have been correctly categorised and challenged by a SQEP; Safeguards are in place to avoid under-categorisation of changes or ‘salami slicing’; The licensee’s arrangements identify, and meet ONR’s expectations for, the need to communicate Category 1 and 2 change proposals to ONR and include a derived power which will allow ONR to provide formal agreement to change proposals as set out in the bullet points in paragraph 5.16; The licensee’s arrangements encourage authors of change proposals to make provision for timely engagement with ONR. Principle 5 The licensee should assess and justify the safety of a proposed change, commensurate with its potential impact on safety, identify and implement suitable controls to ensure nuclear safety is not adversely affected and monitor the implementation of the change 5.56 Changes which are identified via the initial screening assessment as falling into categories 1, 2 and 3, as illustrated in Appendix 3, should be subject to a more detailed assessment which is documented as part of the justification for the change. The justification should ordinarily include: A statement of the reason for and objectives of the change. This is typically identified in the ‘initial screening assessment’; A risk assessment; An implementation plan. 5.57 Changes assessed as having a significant potential impact on nuclear safety i.e. Categories 1, 2 should be subject to a more detailed risk assessment which is documented as part of the justification for the change. The risk assessment should be proportionate to the nuclear safety significance and complexity of the change being proposed. The assessment should identify the ‘enablers’, or arrangements that need to be put in place to facilitate the change proposal and ensure that risks are controlled. These should include actions required to mitigate the risks arising from both the final outcome of the change and during transition as appropriate. The licensee may identify a need to undertake a formal workload assessment for changes that have the potential to impact on the workload of an individual(s). 5.58 In many cases achieving an adequate assessment is unlikely without active consultation with the staff affected by the proposed change at an appropriate stage. Although this can be sensitive, many post holders will have a unique knowledge of how they carry out their work and what its demands are. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 14 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.59 The risk assessment for a large, complex change proposal may indicate that it is preferable to divide the overall change into smaller, more manageable elements. This may have advantages in that elements can be assigned to different leads that have better-defined responsibilities and knowledge for taking a change forward. However, there are risks in this approach because potential dependencies between these elements may be missed. For example, an individual responsible for one element may make assumptions about the continued provision of resources or arrangements that might be affected by changes to other elements. 5.60 In such instances, the licensee should produce an umbrella or ‘overarching’ management of change proposal to define the scope of the overall proposal and set a single, coherent framework for managing the different elements which are encompassed within it. The risk assessment for the overarching management of change should reference the risks related to specific elements, but should also take a broader cross-cutting perspective. It should also consider risks arising at the interfaces between the various elements. 5.61 ONR expects the licensee to put in place suitable processes for endorsing change proposals. Usually, Category 3 and 4 changes may be endorsed by the originator or local process owner following an independent review of the classification or category. However, Category 1 and 2 changes should be endorsed by an individual who has a full understanding of the implications of the proposed change. Such individuals are more likely to be at a more senior level in the licensee organisation. 5.62 As noted in Principle 3, justification documents for Category 1 and 2 arrangements may need advice by a Nuclear Safety Committee or an equivalent body in accordance with the licensee’s arrangements. 5.63 The mitigating actions and enablers identified in the risk assessment should, following endorsement, be addressed in an implementation plan. The implementation plan should show how the mitigating actions and enablers will be delivered and managed. It should include a clear definition of responsibilities for taking forward the change and maintaining a suitable level of managerial oversight. For example, the inspector should be able to find evidence that documentation has been endorsed to confirm that enabling actions have been completed and to confirm that the change may proceed. 5.64 The output of a risk assessment may indicate that it is preferable to introduce the change on a phased or staged basis as a means of best managing the risks associated with the change. This should be reflected in the implementation plan, and the licensee should consider introducing stage gates, or hold points, as necessary to manage the process. ONR interaction may be considered appropriate by the licensee or ONR for some of these stages, depending on the nuclear safety significance. 5.65 The implementation plan should also include indicators that can be used to monitor progress in implementing the change and provide confidence that no adverse effects are being realised. These indicators may be qualitative or quantitative as appropriate. They should primarily be ‘leading’ indicators that consider the potential consequences of the change being inadequately conceived or executed such as training completed; overtime worked; maintenance backlogs etc., rather than ‘lagging’ indicators which typically monitor reduction in accident rates. 5.66 Significant changes i.e. those identified as Category 1 or 2 in Appendix 3, should have Board/Executive oversight, using indicators and any other appropriate measures, to confirm that changes are being correctly managed. In the event that a change is not proceeding satisfactorily the Board/Executive should identify and sponsor remedial action. This monitoring should be proportionate to the significance of the change and continue for the life of the change. It should also include a post-completion review to confirm that the objectives of the change have been satisfactorily achieved. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 15 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.67 Where possible, the implementation plan should reflect potential contingency actions that may be required in the event that the change is not proceeding as planned. Where potential consequences are high it may be appropriate for the licensee to maintain for a suitable period the capability to reverse the change. 5.68 Justification documents should be formally signed off when the change is complete and should be retained as a record in accordance with the licensee’s LC 6 arrangements. It can be helpful to ‘close out’ the change at an appropriate date, after the outcome has been monitored and sufficient confidence has been gained that the change need not be reversed or altered significantly. 5.69 Under LC36 (6), ONR may direct a licensee to halt a change to its organisation structure or resources if it is concerned the change may have been inadequately conceived or executed. In practice, it is envisaged that this power will be used rarely. In such circumstances, ONR and the licensee should discuss the proposed change and seek to resolve any issues such that an agreed way forward is established. If ONR is content that the proposed change, amended if necessary, may proceed then it will provide a formal consent to permit it to progress. 5.70 The inspector should consider whether or not:             Assessments of proposed changes are proportionate to the significance and category of the change; Assessments have been carried out by competent persons and adequately consider the change be inadequately conceived or executed; the range of potential consequences should The licensee has acknowledged the need to develop an ‘overarching ‘management of change assessment as a means of defining and coordinating larger, more complex changes; The licensee’s arrangements provide for a staged approach to implementing larger, complex changes and make provision for ONR intervention as appropriate; Justification documents have been formally endorsed to confirm that proposed changes may proceed and signed off upon completion of necessary enabling actions by a SQEP; Changes have been adequately documented to enable the objective of the change, and the change categorisation to be clearly understood; Enabling and mitigating actions for Category 1 and 2 changes are relevant and satisfactorily address the identified risks; The licensee’s senior management and the Nuclear Safety Committee have been involved in considering the implications a Category 1 change prior to implementation; Arrangements are in place in the licensee organisation to monitor Category 1 and 2 changes and, in the event that a change is not proceeding satisfactorily, to initiate remedial action; Suitable qualitative or quantitative indicators have been developed significant changes and if they are linked to enabling and remedial actions; for The indicators are being used to monitor the effectiveness of implementation of significant changes; There is a process to check the quality and consistency of justification documents; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 16 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation   Justification documents are filed within a site-wide system and available for scrutiny; There is a post-change review process to enable learning points from successful and unsuccessful changes to be taken into account for future changes and, if appropriate, incorporated into the licensee’s management of change arrangements. Principle 6 The licensee should periodically review the effectiveness of the overall arrangements and the changes that have been implemented. 5.71 The licensee should be encouraged to capture the learning gained from applying its management of change process, especially to larger and more complex changes. This should be reflected, where appropriate, in changed arrangements e.g. training. The arrangements themselves should be subject to periodic review to confirm that they are working satisfactorily and to identify process improvements. Reviews may take the form of formal audit by a licensee’s assurance function or management reviews as part of a structured approach to business improvement. 5.72 It is important that the senior management are engaged in the review process to demonstrate leadership and commitment to the management of change arrangements. The effectiveness of the arrangements, and the totality of changes and their impact on the organisation, should be regularly reviewed by them to ensure that the arrangements are working satisfactorily and that the organisation is not being degraded as a result of a succession of changes. 5.73 The inspector should consider whether or not:        The arrangements provide for the Board/Executive to monitor the effectiveness of implementation of more significant changes; There is a formal review process to confirm that the management of change arrangements are operating satisfactorily; Senior management are engaged in the review process and how their leadership and commitment is demonstrated to the workforce; The review process involves persons other than those with a management of change process role to ensure that the views of originators and implementers are captured; The outcome of reviews is shared with the workforce; There is a mechanism for sharing learning and building that learning back into the arrangements as part of continuous improvement; The cumulative effects of multiple changes on the organisation have been considered by senior management and if there is any evidence of action being taken to avoid the potential degradation of the licensee organisation. 6. APPENDICES APPENDIX 1: LICENCE CONDITION 36 ‘ORGANISATIONAL CAPABILITY’ 6.1 Licence Condition 36 requires that:  The licensee shall provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources to ensure the safe operation of the licensed site. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 17 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation  Without prejudice to the requirements of paragraph 1, the licensee shall make its implement adequate arrangements and organisational structure or resources which may affect safety. to control any change to     The licensee shall submit to ONR for approval such part or parts of the aforesaid arrangements as the Executive may specify. The licensee shall ensure that once approved no alteration or amendment is made to the approved arrangements unless the ONR has approved such alteration or amendment. The aforesaid arrangements shall provide for the classification of changes to the organisational structure or resources according to their safety significance. The arrangements shall include a requirement for the provision of adequate documentation to justify the safety of any proposed change and shall where appropriate provide for the submission of such documentation to the ONR. The licensee shall if so directed by the ONR halt the change to its organisational structure or resources and the licensee shall not recommence such change without the consent of the ONR. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 18 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation APPENDIX 2: EXAMPLES OF DRIVERS FOR ORGANISATIONAL CHANGE 6.2 This appendix provides some examples of drivers for organisational change and the potential implications for nuclear safety if a change is inadequately conceived or executed.           Cost reduction. This may result in inadequate resources being available to fulfil baseline organisational roles. Sales, acquisitions, mergers or creation of subsidiary companies. This may lead to a loss of nuclear related expertise at Board and Executive level, resulting in a lack of understanding of what is required to maintain the defence in depth which is essential to the achievement of very high levels of safety. Corporate mergers may result in a lack of harmonisation of standards and procedures, and a responsibilities and accountabilities. lack of clarity of managerial Downsizing, re-engineering and outsourcing. in understaffing and lack of competent staff or 'intelligent customer' capability to make an informed judgement. It may lead to instances where there is insufficient competent staff available to assess the safety significance of activities with the potential to impact on nuclear safety, or the loss of ‘corporate memory’ in a particular field. This may result Reduction of the numbers of layers of management. This may result in inadequate supervision or oversight of staff work, or an unacceptable increase in individual workload or management spans of control. Organisational development. This is particularly appropriate in the case of new build organisations where the organisation structure may change several times as the project progress both within a particular project phase and as the project progresses from one phase to the next. Organisational restructuring and change initiatives. This may result in competent staff being diverted to restructuring/change projects. Downgrading the Head of Safety post so that he or she is no longer a member of the licensee’s Executive or Board, resulting in a loss of independent, authoritative advice for nuclear safety at Board level. Relocation of offices. This may result in the loss of key staff and expertise in critical areas. Changes in policies for recruitment and training of staff. This may result from national skills shortages, demographics etc leading to vacancies not being filled, recruitment of poor quality staff, and degradation of the competence of individuals and the organisation as a whole. Change in Board / Executive. Although not necessarily an organisational change this change could still result in significant safety risks. Organisational change control can be used as a flexible risk assessment tool in these cases, which is seen as good practice, allowing the organisation to manage potential risks. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 19 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation APPENDIX 3 : BROAD GUIDANCE ON CLASSIFICATION OF ORGANISATIONAL CHANGES 6.3 The approach to classifying changes may vary according to licensee. The following example classifications are provided for illustrative purposes to guide the inspector:  Category 1 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result in a major reduction in the standards of nuclear safety with the potential for on- site and off-site impact such as: o Wide ranging company or site changes that have the potential to affect the validity of, or basis on which, the nuclear site licence was granted. o Changes resulting in the granting of a new site licence. o Sale, acquisition or merger of a licensee organisation or a nuclear licensed site. o Changes involving more than one business unit, division or site. o Large-scale downsizing or outsourcing of a nuclear safety significant function.  Category 2 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result in a significant reduction in the standards of nuclear safety with the potential to affect a large proportion of or the whole of a site such as: o Changes that affect people within a whole facility. o Changes that affect a whole department or large groups of staff. o Changes that affect several layers of management. o Significant reduction in the size of a team that has an EH&S role. o Changes with significant potential to adversely impact on a site’s emergency response. o Changes resulting in a significant transfer of key EH&S accountabilities and responsibilities such as those associated with DAP duties. o Changes in staff shift patterns  Category 3 changes, which if inadequately conceived or executed, could result in a minor reduction in the standards of nuclear safety with the potential to affect a single plant, department or business unit such as: o Changes that affect staff within one process area or a significant part of a plant. o Changes that affect a small group of staff, such as part of a department. o Small reduction in the size of a team. o Changes in management accountabilities/responsibilities that have a small impact on EH&S. o Transfer of responsibilities between departments/units.  Category 4 changes with negligible or no effect on nuclear safety such as: o Changes to organisational responsibilities that do not lead to a significant increase in the workload of any line manager or group of staff. o A reduction in the size of a team that has little or no EH&S role. o Staff being moved or leaving following completion of a project or package of work. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 20 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.4 6.5 6.6 APPENDIX 4: GUIDANCE TO INSPECTORS ON THE APPROACH TO BE UNDERTAKEN FOR ASSURING COMPLIANCE WITH THE ‘ADEQUACY OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES’ ASPECT OF LC 36(1) The purpose of this appendix is to support a proportionate and consistent regulatory approach to ONR inspection and assessment against the financial resources aspect of LC 36 (1) ‘Organisational Capability’. Purpose and scope Background Article 6(5) of the Nuclear Safety Directive 2009/71/Euratom requires member states to ensure that licensees are required to provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources to fulfil their obligations in respect of nuclear safety. In order to ensure that this requirement was fully transposed in Great Britain, LC 36 was changed in July 2011 to introduce a revised LC 36(1) which requires licensees to provide and maintain adequate financial and human resources to ensure the safe operation of the licensed site. ONR consulted with all nuclear site licence holders on this amendment (and a proposed modification to LC 17) and conducted an impact assessment. ONR also published a supporting note advising that ONR considered licensees would already comply with the requirement to provide and maintain adequate human resources, by virtue of their Nuclear Baseline. The note also stated that: “On a day-to-day basis, compliance with legal duties to ensure an appropriate level of nuclear safety is likely to be sufficient evidence of compliance with the licence condition regarding the licensee’s existing financial resources”. With regard to the requirement to maintain adequate financial resources, ONR’s view is that the licensee should be able to clearly demonstrate that it:      Understands the hazards and risks of its undertakings and is operating in accordance with its safety case and complying with the licence conditions; Is reducing risk so far as is reasonably practicable, and implementing improvements in a timely manner where these are identified as ALARP; Is maintaining an adequate Nuclear Baseline resource and implementing its arrangements for managing organisational change set out under LC 36(2); Has assessed what financial resources are necessary to continue to meet those needs; Has, and is maintaining, or has in place arrangements to obtain, the necessary financial resources; and  Has relevant records and they are being retained in accordance with LC 6. Guidance on inspection of arrangements Regulatory Approach 6.7 The financial resources of a licensee are not ordinarily the focus of routine inspection activities. Rather, inspectors should be alert to indirect evidence that may indicate a reduction in the ability or willingness of the licensee to provide or maintain adequate financial resources to ensure safety. Evidence may include failure to resource plant improvements; staff shortages that are not being filled; delays in delivering activities such as maintenance etc. Should indications be found that investment in safety- related plant or people may not be adequate to provide and maintain safety, the inspector should seek to establish whether it is attributable to other factors (for example difficulties in identifying SQEP resource; technical difficulties or disagreements etc.) and, if so, to progress the matter in the normal manner. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 21 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6.8 If the safety issue cannot be resolved to the satisfaction of the inspector, and financial resource issues are identified as a possible factor, this matter should be elevated to the relevant Superintending Inspector and Professional lead for consideration. It is anticipated that discussions will take place with the licensee to determine the cause of the issue and attempt to resolve it. This may entail an ONR review of safety cases; annual financial accounts, plans for construction and key financial decision points; investment plans; lifetime plans, the nuclear baseline and other documents. If the issue cannot be resolved, and failure to comply with LC 36(1) is suspected, consideration may be given to engaging external expert financial advice to inform the process of establishing ONR’s enforcement options. The need to take this course of action is expected to be rare. 6.9 Where the licensee's budget is controlled by another body (for example, the Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) or a parent organisation), financial (and other resourcing) arrangements are likely to be set out in contractual arrangements such as a Shareholders Agreement between the licensee and the controlling body. ONR may seek to examine these documents. ONR anticipates that the controlling body will co- operate with the licensee in ensuring the adequacy of the resources needed for safety, and to meet its obligations under HSWA Section 3(1). The licensee, however, retains an absolute responsibility for nuclear safety. Government assurances regarding a licensee’s financial standing 6.10 ONR will approach the relevant government department at the time of processing a licence application, or responding to a request for relicensing, to seek its assurances regarding the applicant’s financial status. ONR may, on rare occasions when it deems it relevant, also seek such assurances from government to inform ONR’s approach set out in paragraphs 6.7 to 6.9 above. Government assurances will be used by ONR to provide confidence that, at the point of licensing, an organisation’s financial arrangements are adequate to enable it to fulfil its obligations as a nuclear site licence holder. Subsequent to the granting of a licence, the approach set out in paragraphs 6.7 to 6.9 above will be followed. Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 22 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation APPENDIX 5: GUIDANCE FOR INSPECTORS ON THE FACTORS THAT MAY BE CONSIDERED WHEN INSPECTING THE LICENSEE’S IMPLEMENTATION OF ITS MANAGEMENT OF CHANGE ARRANGEMENTS 6.11 The following ‘short-form’ guidance is provided to assist inspectors to judge the adequacy of licensees’ arrangements to comply with LC 36 clauses (2) to (5). In order to promote a consistent regulatory approach, this appendix incorporates guidance previously included within the inspection guidance T/INS/036. This Appendix complements the more detailed guidance in the main body of this TAG and reference to that material should be made where appropriate. Management of change arrangements 6.12 Interview a sample of Board, Executive and Lead Team members to examine their knowledge of:            The importance of management of change arrangements as an integral part of business strategy implementation, nuclear safety and resource management; The need for the Board/Executive to visibly commit to management of organisational change as a key business process; The need for the implications of all proposed organisational changes to be formally assessed using a consistent methodology which is an integral part of the licensee’s management system; The Board/Executive’s role in ensuring that the implications of significant and complex changes are fully assessed prior to implementation; The Board/Executive’s role in providing oversight of significant and complex changes and ensuring that the objectives of the changes are met; The importance of regularly monitoring the state of the organisation to ensure that nuclear safety is not progressively degraded over time as a result of a succession of changes; The need to regularly review that the licensee’s management of change arrangements are up to date and are being consistently applied across the entirety of the licensee organisation;  The importance of having SQEPs in key management of change roles. 6.13 Check that the baseline contains a substantiation of the ‘right size and structure’ for the licensee organisation. Check that there is not a presumption that the existing structure is adequate. 6.14 Check that the arrangements are linked to human resource processes and that Human Resources is involved in assessing implications of changes for workforce planning and training, and taking action as appropriate. 6.15 Interview some of the managers proposing changes and key role holders such as reviewers to examine their knowledge of: Roles and responsibilities; Staging of changes where appropriate; The value of enabling actions which have been properly identified and managed i.e. verifiably closed out; Use of performance indicators and contingency measures or remedial actions, and that they have been properly identified and managed; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 23 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation           The importance of reviews at appropriate times during implementation. Records requirements. 6.16 Confirm that the arrangements are being adhered to by discussion with staff at various levels throughout the licensee’s organisation. 6.17 Check the change register and observe if: There are similar, linked changes which should have been managed in a coordinated manner i.e. under an umbrella or overarching management of change, and given a higher change category; There is evidence of ‘salami slicing’ of a larger change into a series of smaller changes. 6.18 Check the licensee's implementation of its review and audit processes and examine: Periodic review and update of the nuclear baseline; Reviews of performance indicators during and after implementation; Categorisation reviews; Independent safety reviews; Reviews of implementation of the arrangements and plans for improvement. Reviews of cumulative effects of change on the organisation. 6.19 Check the licensee’s communication arrangements to confirm whether or not the workforce understands the implications of significant changes and is kept informed of implementation progress.  Check that arrangements exist to periodically update the nuclear baseline and that the baseline is up to date and reflective of the licensee organisation. Implementation of change proposals 6.20 Select a sample of change proposals for checking. The sample should include top category changes if there have been any, and lower category changes throughout the range of significance. The sample should ideally include any corporate changes which may affect safety on site. Consider ‘calling in’ changes (at any or all category levels) for specialist assessment. 6.21 For each change proposal in the sample:  Check the register of change proposals to confirm that change proposals for significant changes were reviewed and authorised through the appropriate route and available in time to provide 20 working days’ notice for ONR assessment prior to implementation if required.  Make a judgement about the accuracy of the classification of the change.  Check that the substantiation document for significant changes includes where appropriate: o A clear description of the objectives of the change; o A reference to the nuclear baseline; o A risk assessment which has been used to inform the classification of the o A detailed implementation plan with timescales, including staging of the change change; where appropriate; Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 24 of 25 Office for Nuclear Regulation o Enabling actions as precursors to implementation of the change; o Performance indicators to monitor the effectiveness of implementation; o Contingency plans and remedial actions; o Shadow working to confirm planned arrangements where appropriate. Check that authorisation to proceed with the proposed change was granted by a SQEP. Check that all enabling actions for significant changes were satisfactorily closed out before the appropriate parts of the change were implemented. Verify a sample of the actions if appropriate. Check that the performance indicators were used to monitor implementation progress and that contingency plans or remedial actions were invoked at an appropriate time. Check that the change proposal was signed off as complete by a SQEP. Check that the objectives of the change were met. Check that any staff implications have been satisfactorily addressed, for example: o Vacancy filling and recruitment; o Training and development. Check that the baseline has been updated to reflect the impact on baseline roles where appropriate.        Report : NS-TAST-GD-048 Revision 5 TRIM Ref: 2018/283567 Page 25 of 25 cns-tast-gd-4.3.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

SIGNIFICANCE 

OVERSIGHT OF SUPPLIERS OF ITEMS OR SERVICES OF NUCLEAR SECURITY 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/106068) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 

7.  SUPPLY CHAIN OVERSIGHT AND ASSURANCE ............................................................ 4 

8.  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 8 

9.  GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................. 9 

 

© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 

 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 9 

 

 
1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 1). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 2). 

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance (CS&IA) documentation that helps them demonstrate 
ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The 
SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their 
assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  
This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s supply 
chain management arrangements.  It aims to provide general advice and guidance to 
ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out 
how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the detail, 
targets or methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have 
addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe 
this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate. 

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. 

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an 
important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation. 

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 3) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 4). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 2 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that ‘a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied’. The importance of issues 
relating to assurance activities are also recognised in the Nuclear Security 
Fundamentals, specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12  

h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues 
and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear 
security including cyber security at all times. 

A more detailed description of the elements is provided in Recommendations level 
guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 5). 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.3 – Oversight 
of Suppliers, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear Supply Chain Management.  The TAG is 
consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 6) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises. 

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 7) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

This TAG is to be used by inspectors in their assessment of the adequacy of the 
dutyholder’s arrangements for the supply chain management of items or services of 
nuclear security significance. 

The effective procurement of items and services is a fundamental element in the 
provision of an adequate security infrastructure to deliver an appropriate and enduring 
security effect. 

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

6.1 

6.2 

 

 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 3 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

Regulatory Expectations 

6.3 

The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders will describe in the security plan how 
they apply oversight of suppliers of items or services of nuclear security significance to 
support effective nuclear supply chain management arrangements. 

FSyP 4 - Nuclear Supply Chain 
Management 

Oversight of Suppliers of Items or 
Services of Nuclear Security 
Significance 

SyDP 4.3 

Dutyholders should conduct effective oversight and assurance of their supply chain.  

 
The purchaser should establish an effective commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy 
to enable effective delivery of items and/or services. The purchaser’s commercial 
and/or Supply Chain strategy will influence all arrangements associated with the 
procurement security items or services. An effective strategy with appropriate oversight 
and assurance, deployed through the organisation’s business planning process should 
ensure delivery of an effective security solution. 

Oversight arrangements should include measures to review contracts, how 
relationships are managed and performance analysis of vendors. 

There are parties who might wish to substitute counterfeit, fraudulent or suspect items 
for genuine items or services for commercial gain and assurance activities should 
include a focus on the application of processes to prevent such items from entering the 
Supply Chain. Of equal concern is that parties may wish to incorporate a ‘back door’ to 
Operational Technology or Information Technology (OT/IT) to allow subsequent ease 
of access following installation. Dutyholders should be aware that such ‘back doors’ 
can create significant vulnerabilities and give specific consideration to mitigate their 
introduction. There is also the possibility that a party acting maliciously may wish to 
introduce latent defects (for example by installing malware on OT/IT) for subsequent 
exploitation.  Dutyholders and their supply chain should recognise these issues and 
have in place appropriate arrangements to mitigate them. 

6.7 

Assurance activities should ensure appropriate arrangements are in place for all 
contracts involving security classified information or equipment including that 
considered SNI in accordance with FSyP7 and its associated delivery principles. 

7. 

SUPPLY CHAIN OVERSIGHT AND ASSURANCE 

The dutyholder should conduct effective oversight and assurance of the Supply Chain, 
including the acceptance of items or services for work with security significance. 

The dutyholder should establish effective arrangements for the oversight of supplier 
performance throughout the contract period and their quality assurance to ensure that 
items or services will meet the specified intent. The dutyholder should ensure that it 
has sufficient capability to oversee and assure performance throughout the tiers of the 
Supply Chain. Assurance activities should include the inspection, test, release, 
acceptance and storage of security significant items and services. 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

7.1 

7.2 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 4 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

7.3 

7.4 

7.5 

Dutyholders should develop and retain sufficient Intelligent Customer capability to 
specify, conduct oversight and assurance, monitor manufacturing, fabrication and 
testing, and acceptance for technical adequacy of the items or services being 
purchased. 

The dutyholder’s oversight and assurance arrangements should review the supplier’s 
security culture and procedures, during and post contract award to ensure the Supply 
Chain organisations and their leaders continue to understand and promote the 
importance of nuclear security and the contribution of any security significant 
equipment or service they supply, to achieving the requirements of the dutyholder. 

The level of oversight and assurance deployed by the dutyholder should be guided by 
the performance of the supplier or Supply Chain. If performance is below expectation 
then the dutyholder should increase the level of engagement, oversight and assurance 
controls until supplier performance meets expectations or until completion or 
termination of the contract. Conversely, if a supplier demonstrates routine delivery to 
the specified requirements, right first time, every time, the dutyholder may consider a 
change to the method and extent of oversight and assurance as appropriate (i.e. from 
release inspection at the manufacturer’s works to receipt inspection at the purchaser’s 
facility).  

Oversight 

7.6 

The level of oversight deployed by the dutyholder should be commensurate with the 
impact of the item or service if it fails to meet the specified intent. The dutyholder’s 
approach should be influenced by the type of contract, the performance of the supplier, 
their suppliers and the implications to security of poor performance. Dutyholders are 
likely to deploy some or all of the following approaches: 

  Contract Review – Meetings between the supplier and dutyholder should 
review performance and delivery issues including security requirements.  

  Supplier Relationship Management – Used to maintain effective relationships 

between the supplier and dutyholder throughout the contract period to achieve 
common objectives. Effective relationship management should support a 
collaborative approach between the dutyholder and supplier. 

  Vendor Analysis – Performance analysis throughout the contract period with 

data collated on contract success criteria, delivery to correct quality, schedule 
and cost. Vendor analysis may be utilised to target and demonstrate 
improvements, rank and rate suppliers and maintain a dutyholder’s preferred 
suppliers listing. 

  Review of the supplier’s quality assurance arrangements to ensure appropriate 

standards are also applied to their suppliers alongside appropriate testing of 
these items on receipt.  

7.7 

The dutyholder’s Supply Chain oversight arrangements should generate quantitative 
and qualitative performance data to demonstrate that suppliers of security significant 
items or services will meet specified target levels. Dutyholders should instigate 
remedial measures as appropriate, which may include withdrawal of contract, to 
address sub-standard performance that may impact nuclear security. 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 5 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

Assurance 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

7.8 

7.9 

7.10 

The dutyholder should have suitable assurance and acceptance processes for items or 
services being supplied or undertaken by others on its behalf. The level of assurance, 
inspection and test deployed upon item or service completion should be 
commensurate with the security significance of the item or service being supplied. 

Acceptance of items or services may include verification or independent assessment 
using second or independent third party organisations. This should be planned and 
executed, in part, by the application of quality plans. This approach provides essential 
levels of assurance which are in addition to that provided through the supplier’s own 
quality arrangements. 

In deciding the levels of assurance, in addition to the security significance of the item 
or service, the dutyholder should consider: the level of assurance normally applied to 
the item or service for its intended use, the code/standard requirements, and the 
difficulty of inspection and testing post-manufacture or installation. It is important that 
ONR has access to all parties that are carrying out quality related activities if 
requested. Access is normally arranged through the dutyholder. This should include 
lower-tier suppliers. 

7.11  The dutyholder’s assurance activities should examine the effectiveness of 

arrangements for the transport, receipt and storage of items or assembly sub-
components within the dutyholder’s facilities prior to delivery from the supplier. The 
storage arrangements should be sufficient to maintain item traceability and prevent 
damage, loss, deterioration, tampering or inadvertent use. 

Inspectors should consider: 

  Do the dutyholder’s oversight and assurance processes allow them control of 

their supply chain management and procurement process arrangements for 
security significant items, from specification of requirement and sourcing a 
supplier including contract award, through to manufacture of item, construction 
of facility or provision of item or service? 

  Does the dutyholder confirm through its oversight and assurance processes 
that its expectations are understood, communicated throughout the Supply 
Chain and routinely reviewed to ensure that suppliers have appropriate 
understanding of the security application and importance of their high 
consequence items or services? 

  Does the dutyholder have sufficient capability to oversee and assess 

performance throughout the Supply Chain, and confirm that the level of 
oversight and assurance deployed by the supplier post contract award is 
commensurate with the risk of the item or service failing to meet the specified 
intent? These QA arrangements for the supply chain may be delivered by the 
principal contractor employed by the dutyholder. 

  Does the dutyholder utilise qualitative and quantitative data to demonstrate 

supplier performance during contract execution and instigate remedial 
measures where appropriate? 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 6 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

 

Is the dutyholder carrying out adequate and appropriate assurance and 
acceptance of items or services being supplied or undertaken by others on its 
behalf? 

  Are any Inspection Agencies used competent to provide third party assurance 

and verification of items or services significant to security? 

  Do the dutyholder’s assurance processes undertake regular reviews of the 

supplier’s quality activities including the release of hold points, with the level of 
evidence to support hold point release defined and tested?  

  Do the dutyholder’s assurance processes undertake regular reviews of 

supplier’s quality activities for Technical Queries (TQs), with a specific focus on 
the aggregation of multiple TQs? 

  Does the dutyholder seek assurance from suppliers that the measures 
introduced to prevent CSFI from entering supply chain are in place and 
effective? 

 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 7 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

REFERENCES 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

8. 

 
1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5.  

 
 
6. 

Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036   

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357 

 
7. 
 
 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management 
System. 
 

 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 8 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

9. 

 

 
 

 

CFSI 

CPPNM 

CS&IA 

FSyP 

IAEA 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

SCM 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SyAPs 

SyDP 

TAG 

TQ 

Counterfeit, Fraudulent or Suspect Item 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

Cyber Security and Information Assurance 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation 

Supply Chain Management 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Security Assessment Principles 

Security Delivery Principle 

Technical Assessment Guide 

Technical Query 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.3 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106068 

Page 9 of 9 

ns-tast-gd-030.pdf
 Title of document ONR GUIDE Probabilistic Safety Analysis Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-030 Revision 6 Date Issued: June 2019 Review Date: June 2022 Approved by: R Moscrop Professional Lead Fault Analysis Record Reference: CM9 2018/408246 Revision commentary: Fit for purpose review with minor and insignificant changes 1. TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 4. SAPS ADDRESSED AND RELATIONSHIP WITH WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA STANDARDS ............................................................................................................. 3 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ............................................................................................... 14 6. REFERENCES (GENERAL) .............................................................................................. 23 7. REFERENCES (TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT GUIDES, TAGS) ...................................... 23 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY ................................................................................................................ 24 9. APPENDIX 1 - NS-TAST-GD-030 – ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS FOR REVIEW OF PSAS FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS ......................................................................... 24 10. APPENDIX 2 – NS-TAST-GD-030 – MAPPING BETWEEN ISSUE O (PROBABILISTIC SAFETY ANALYSIS) OF THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TAG ...................................................................................... 79 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2019 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 06/19 Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation INTRODUCTION 1. 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 ONR has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other dutyholders. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This technical assessment guide is one of these guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE The purpose of this technical assessment guide is to provide an interpretation of those Safety Assessment Principles (Ref 6.1) related to PSA and to provide specific guidance to inspectors engaged in the assessment of PSAs and PSA related submissions (from Licensees, Licence Applicants or Generic Design Assessment (GDA) Requesting Parties. All these are referred to as dutyholders in this TAG). The “SAPs addressed” section of this TAG concentrates on interpretation of the SAPs; general guidance on the assessment of PSA is given in the “Advice to inspectors” section. Detailed guidance on the assessment of PSA specific to Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) is provided in Appendix 1. As with all guidance, inspectors should use their judgement and discretion in the depth and scope to which they apply the guidance provided in this TAG and its Appendix 1. This TAG does not provide detailed information on how to judge the technical adequacy of the various PSA aspects assessed. The reviewers should use their own knowledge and experience for this. However, aid can be sought in the publications listed in Sections 5, 6, 7 and in Appendix 1. It is not the intention of this guide to prescribe specific methods and approaches for conducting PSA. Dutyholders may choose to use alternative methods to those covered by this TAG (and in particular its Appendix 1) as long as they lead to equally valid outcomes. In cases where the PSA or specific areas of it have been undertaken using alternative approaches inspectors should review them on a case-by-case basis and judge them on their own merits. External expert support may be sought if necessary. In addition, it should be noted that PSA covers a whole range of disciplines and, therefore, PSA assessment requires involvement of inspectors with in-depth expertise in a range of areas such as fault studies and thermal-hydraulic analysis, mechanical, electrical and C&I systems, civil engineering, human factors, software reliability, structural integrity, internal and external hazards, severe accident and radiation safety. On the other hand, individual assessments of said areas of the safety case can benefit from, and should take advantage of, the insights the PSA provides on the relative importance of issues addressed in those technical areas. Inspectors must be able to form an opinion on whether risks are ALARP and it is not unreasonable to expect numerical input to the demonstration that the risk is ALARP. NS-TAST-GD-051 (Ref 7.10) provides further guidance on the role of PSA within safety cases and NS-TAST-GD-005 (Ref 7.1) provides further guidance on the role of PSA in the demonstration of ALARP. Although this TAG does not specifically cover PSA for the risk to persons on-site from nuclear accidents, it provides sufficient information to help inspectors assessing the PSA inputs for this particular aspect of the safety case provided by the dutyholders. PSA’s primary focus is usually to assess off-site risks; however PSA may be used to Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 2 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation provide an input to assessment of on-site risk and comparison against Numerical Targets 5 and 6. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 The site licence conditions give a legal framework which can be drawn on in assessment and are, in general, set out in the form of requiring the licensee to make adequate arrangements, in the interests of safety, to secure certain objectives. The principal licence conditions (LCs) relevant to PSA are LC14, LC15, LC23, LC24, LC27 and LC28. LC14 requires the licensee to make and implement adequate arrangements for the production and assessment of safety cases. Normally, the licensee’s safety case will need to contain PSA as well as deterministic analysis. LC15 sets out the requirements for periodic review and reassessment of safety cases. The periodic reviews carried out under these arrangements include those for updating / extending the PSA (or producing one, if none previously existing, and comparison with relevant good practice) and using it to support the arguments for continuing operation during the period until the next review. LC23 requires that the safety case identifies the conditions and limits necessary in the interest of safety and it is ONR’s expectation that both the probabilistic (PSA) and the deterministic aspects of the safety case will contribute to this process. Similarly, ONR expects that PSA will contribute to the identification of suitable and sufficient safety mechanisms, devices and circuits, as required by LC27 and provide a significant input for LC28 in identifying plant that may affect safety for which regular, systematic examination, inspection, maintenance and testing will be required. LC24 requires the licensee to ensure that all operating instructions which may affect safety are written down and include all operating instructions that are necessary in the interests of safety. Thus, ONR expects the PSA to be well documented, wide in scope and of high fidelity. In addition to these principal licence conditions, LC6 requires that adequate records be made and maintained. In this regard, it is ONR’s expectation that licensees will establish Living PSA programmes and that, in the framework of these programmes, all relevant files and records will be maintained for the life of the facility. Also, LC 17 sets out the requirement for quality assurance (QA) arrangements for all matters that affect safety. In this respect Licensees are expected to establish an adequate QA process that is effectively applied during all phases of the PSA and its application. 3.7 Safety cases, including PSA, may be produced to support activities such as construction of new facilities, commissioning, modifications and decommissioning. These activities, covered by licence conditions 19, 20, 21, 22 and 35, require safety documentation. 4. SAPS ADDRESSED AND RELATIONSHIP WITH WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND IAEA STANDARDS 4.1 Introduction This guide interprets ONR’s use of the PSA related safety assessment principles as set out in ONR’s SAPs (Ref 6.1) FA.1, and FA.10 to FA.14. This guide also addresses those aspects of the principles on ‘assurance of validity', AV.1 to AV.8, that are specifically applicable to PSA. Numerical targets related to PSA are explained more fully in annex 2 of the SAPs, and predominantly relate to Targets 7, 8 and 9. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 3 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 4.2 Fault analysis: general – Design basis analysis, PSA and severe accident analysis – FA.1 “Fault analysis should be carried out comprising suitable and sufficient design basis analysis, PSA and severe accident analysis to demonstrate that risks are ALARP” This principle outlines the inter-relationship between the three types of fault analysis, DBA, PSA and SAA and how in combination they address the range of potential initiating events (IEs) with nuclear safety significance off the site. As with DBA and SAA, the scope of PSA should be suitable and sufficient and used along with the other two fault analysis approaches to help demonstrate that risks are ALARP and to address SAPs Numerical Targets 7, 8 and 9. 4.3 Fault analysis: PSA – Need for a PSA – FA.10 “Suitable and sufficient PSA should be performed as part of the fault analysis and design development and analysis” This principle sets the framework and requirements for a PSA study. The overriding aim of the PSA assessment is to assist ONR judgements on the safety of the facility and whether the risks of its operation are being made as low as reasonably practicable. This TAG provides guidance which will enable inspectors to judge that the above expectation for a suitable and sufficient PSA has been met by the dutyholders. A PSA should be suitable and sufficient to inform: 1) A judgement as to the acceptability of the overall risk of the facility against the numerical targets of the SAPs. 2) A judgement that a balanced design has been achieved, such that no particular class of accident or feature of the facility makes a disproportionate (e.g., of the order of one tenth or greater) contribution to the risk target of concern. However, where risk is low (for example below the BSO), it is unlikely that further engineering measures would be reasonably practicable to address any disproportion. 3) That the risks associated with the design and operation of the facility, as well as changes in risk associated with any modification to plant or operation, are and will remain ALARP. The depth of the PSA for a given facility may vary depending on the magnitude of the radiological hazard and risks and the complexity of the facility. For complex facilities such as nuclear reactors or reprocessing facilities, comprehensive PSAs that meet modern standards should be developed for all types of IEs and all operational modes. It is relevant to stress that ONR expects ALARP to be integral to all considerations of a facility and site whether new or existing, i.e. it is not a process to be carried out only after a design is completed. 4.4 Fault analysis: PSA – Validity – FA.11 “PSA should reflect the current design and operation of the facility or site” This principle establishes the need for each aspect of the PSA to be directly related to existing facility information, facility documentation or the analysts’ assumptions in the absence of such information. The PSA should be documented in such a way as to allow this principle to be met. In addition, in order to meet this principle, the PSA should be kept living, i.e. it should be updated as necessary to reflect the current design and operational features and to Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 4 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation incorporate feedback from internal and external operational experience, improved understanding of physical processes or accident progression and advances in modelling techniques. 4.5 Fault analysis: PSA – Scope and extent – FA.12 “PSA should cover all significant sources of radioactivity, all permitted operating states and all relevant initiating faults” In order to meet this principle the scope of the PSA should cover all significant sources of radioactivity at the facility (e.g., fuel ponds, fuel handling facilities, waste storage tanks, radioactive sources, reactor cores, etc), all types of IEs (e.g., internal faults, internal hazards, external hazards) and all operational modes (e.g., nominal full power/throughput, low power/throughput, shutdown, start-up, refuelling, maintenance outages). Where the offsite consequences are potentially significant, such as for an operating power reactor, the PSA should be at least to level 2 and include all external events (including beyond design basis events that could realistically lead to a significant offsite release (see also SAPs para 618). 4.6 Fault analysis: PSA – Adequate representation – FA.13 “The PSA model should provide an adequate representation of the facility and/or site” 1) General The aim of this principle is to ensure the technical adequacy of the PSA. Inspectors should be satisfied that the PSA has a robust technical basis and thus provides a credible picture of the contributors to the risk from the facility. Starting from the list of IEs from SAP FA.2 (Identification of Initiating Faults), the PSA should identify systematically and comprehensively the complete range of sequences leading to the “undesired” consequences that may occur. This makes no distinction in regard to the frequency at which each sequence is estimated to arise, rather it seeks to ensure that all conceivable routes to a release are systematically identified. In order to address the relevant numerical targets of the SAPs, the PSA needs to have regard to accidents with severe consequences and to those that have a higher frequency but lower radiological consequence. Where there are multiple units or facilities on a site, the PSA should consider all significant sources of radioactivity, including any dependencies or potential for propagation of IEs or other effects between different units or facilities. 2) PSA Models PSA should account for all contributions to the risk, including, but not necessarily restricted to: random component individual failures, components which are failed by the IE, common cause failures (CCFs) (and, as necessary, other dependent and consequential failures), unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance, pre-initiating event human errors (e.g., misalignments and mis-calibrations), human errors that lead to IEs and human errors during the course of the accident sequences (including misdiagnosis, decision errors, omission errors and commission errors). The potential dependencies between separate human activities (either by the same or by different operators) should be analysed and reflected in the models and probabilities used. The level of detail of PSA should be sufficient to ensure that it is realistic, that the logic is correct, that the dependencies are captured, and that the data used is applicable to the boundary selected for each (basic) event in the PSA. Model simplifications (e.g., modelling of bounding sequences, use of super-components) and their justification should be clearly described; particular attention should be paid to ensuring that dependencies are not missed due to such simplifications. As noted in SAPs para 652, Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 5 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation the PSA should model events until a safe stable state is reached and justify the mission time accordingly. The frequency of occurrence and consequences of each of the fault sequences identified should be estimated. Sequences should not be discounted solely on the basis that their individual frequency is low, since the total contribution from all low frequency sequences may be significant in respect to the numerical targets of the SAPs. Where groups are used to represent several IEs or accident sequences, the group should be assigned a frequency equal to the summed frequency of all the contributors in the group and should be represented by the most onerous one (i.e. the IE which is bounding in terms of impacts or the sequence which is bounding in terms of consequences). Thus, such simplifications are always conservative. Care needs to be taken to avoid gross conservatism, since it could affect the conclusions drawn from the analysis, and could severely limit the usefulness of the PSA to support decision- making. Best-estimate methods and data should be used for the transient analyses, accident progression analyses, source term analyses, radiological analysis and any other deterministic analyses that support the PSA. Where no credible best estimate is possible, reasonably conservative assumptions should be made and the sensitivity of the risk to these assumptions should be established. The term “best-estimate” is defined in the SAPs Glossary (Ref 6.1). SAP EDF.14 addresses deterministic consideration of CCFs and discusses the deterministic expectation for modelling of CCFs. Probabilistic modelling of CCFs is expected to be on a best-estimate basis and any claims on CCF in a PSA model should be credible and adequately justified, however additional regulatory scrutiny should be applied for CCFs below 1E-5. PSA studies should identify the relative contribution to risk from the features of the facility and allow a judgement on the balance of the design. This is ideally achieved if each component of the study is treated in a best estimate manner. If one element of the study contains a large measure of conservatism and dominates the resulting risk calculation, evaluating the benefit from improving the reliability of that element, or indeed other elements, is more difficult. Therefore, while the use of conservative design basis analysis within the PSA can be justified to show either that the risks are low, or to act as a screening mechanism for future best estimate analysis, risk-informed decision making could be severely compromised by the use of this type of analysis. 3) PSA Data Facility specific data should be used, to the extent possible, for the calculation of the frequencies and probabilities used in PSA. Where facility specific data is not available, use of generic data may be acceptable providing it is shown to be appropriate to the design and operating conditions of the facility and it relates to a relevant and sufficiently large population. The source of the data, the sample size and the uncertainty in the data should be specified. If changes to the source data are made to take account of differences between the available data and the plant conditions, these should be justified. Where facility specific data is not sufficient it should be combined with applicable generic data using a justified mathematical technique, such as Bayesian update of generic data with facility-specific data (as described, for example, in Refs 6.2 and 6.3). Where no relevant statistical data are available, judgements should be made and their bases stated. Particular attention should be paid to determining the sensitivity of the results of the PSA to such judgements. Ad-hoc judgements not following a robust and systematic process should generally attract inspector’s scrutiny. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 6 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation When models are used for the calculations of probabilities in the PSA, the methodologies used should be justified and should account for all the key influencing factors. In particular: i. Probability data for personnel errors should take account of the specific task demands, psychological influences (e.g. stress), degree of supervision, level of training, working practices, time available, physical environment, etc, and the potential dependencies between separate activities (either by the same or by different operators). Any equipment or procedural requirements to promote reliable human performance should be identified. The best estimate approach to risk analysis requires that the beneficial and potentially detrimental performance of personnel be represented within the PSA. The factors that can influence the ability of personnel to carry out activities need to be carefully considered before any quantification can take place. NS-TAST-GD-063 (Ref 7.3) discusses the subject of Task Analysis which is judged a necessary precursor to any quantification. ii. The approach selected for the Common Cause Failure (CCF) modelling and for CCF parameter estimation should be justified and should be adequate to represent any level of redundancy present in the specific design of the facility. The consideration of coupling mechanisms and facility specific defences against CCF should be traceable. The applicability of the CCF data sources used should be demonstrated. iii. The methodology used for the calculation of probabilities of structural failures should be justified and the details of the analysis should be transparent. If use is made of data from available structural (e.g. pipework) failure databases, the sources of data and the way in which the data has been used should be clear and the applicability of the data should be justified. If use is made of probabilistic fracture mechanics codes, the codes should be state of the art and should have been validated against operational experience and/or experiments. The range of loads and combinations of loads that could lead to the structural failures of concern should be adequate to represent the conditions which are possible for the facility under evaluation. iv. Any methodologies used by licensees to estimate computer or software- based system reliability for use in PSA are expected to use best-estimate methods and to consider uncertainty and sensitivity. These methodologies should meet industry accepted practices and consider the contributions of both hardware and software failures. Estimation of software reliability should take into account influencing factors (primarily systematic) that affect the quality of the software and are informed by the specification and design of the system (e.g. considering the reliability targets for system design based on safety integrity levels in IEC 61508 or equivalent). Any dependencies introduced by the systematic nature of software failure(s) should be accounted for accordingly in the PSA. If software elements of a computer based system (e.g. operating systems, application software supporting different functions) have been individually modelled in the PSA, the dependencies between the various parts should be addressed explicitly. Any self-checking or diagnostic functions built in the computer based system should be taken into account in an adequate manner (e.g. considering the dependencies between these functions and the primary safety functions delivered by the system). The dependencies between two (or more) computer based systems should be dealt with explicitly. NS- TAST-GD-046 (Ref 7.8) and IAEA report NP-T-3.27 (Ref 8.4) provide additional guidance on the assessment of reliability for a computer based system. v. Assumptions on reliability of passive features or passive systems should be substantiated by suitable analysis covering the full range of accident conditions for which they are required and by extensive tests. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 7 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation vi. Analyses to estimate the probability of occurrence of phenomena (for example in the severe accident portion of the PSA) should be performed in a systematic and transparent manner taking account of up-to-date information from an appropriate range of sources about the phenomena. 4) PSA Results The results of the PSA should be comprehensively documented and properly interpreted. The numerical results of the PSA should always be presented together with list/s of minimal cutsets and the list of basic events and associated importance measures (as a minimum Fractional Contributions or Fussell Vesely Importance and Risk Increase factors or Risk Achievement Worth). It should be noted that the importance measures, in themselves, represent sensitivities of the results of the PSA to the inputs and, therefore, the dutyholders should provide justification of whether any high values shown are acceptable and nothing reasonable can be done to reduce unduly high risk contributions. In all aspects of the analysis where assumptions have been made including those on how the plant and the operating staff behave, these and their justification should be clearly described. The sensitivity of the results of the PSA to changes in assumptions should be evaluated and clearly documented. Uncertainty on input probability and frequency values should be estimated and propagated through the models to generate uncertainty distributions on the resulting frequencies or probabilities of undesired events. The means of these distributions should be compared against the numerical targets in the SAPs. Based on the importance, sensitivity and uncertainty evaluations, the dutyholder should gain an understanding of which parametric and modelling uncertainties contribute most to the overall uncertainty in the probabilities or frequencies of undesired events and should, subject to reasonable practicability, take steps to reduce such uncertainties. Ultimately, the results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations should provide confidence that the overall conclusions obtained from the PSA are still valid. “PSA should be used to inform the design process and help ensure the safe operation of the site and its facilities” The aim of this principle is to establish the expectations on what uses the dutyholders should make of the PSA to support decision-making and on how the supporting analyses should be undertaken. 1) Uses of PSA The PSA should provide information for, and receive information from, the facility designers and operators so that consistency is achieved between the PSA and the design and operation of the facility. Following such an approach allows the PSA to be a powerful tool to aid decision making. Inspectors should expect the PSA to provide an input to the following: i. Initial design, design development and design modifications and back-fits during the life of the facility. ONR expects the PSA to be integrated into the design process in an iterative manner, i.e. the PSA should be used in all the stages of the design. ii. Support to the safety classification of structures, systems and components (SSCs). ONR expects PSA to inform the safety classification of SSCs through consideration of importance measures. for example system reliabilities and PSA 4.7 Fault analysis: PSA – Use of PSA – FA.14 Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 8 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation iii. Development of, and changes to, operating limits and conditions and testing, inspection and maintenance schedules of the facility. iv. Testing, inspection and maintenance planning and daily management of plant configuration. v. Periodic system reviews and overall periodic safety review of the facility. vi. Justification for any change to the way in which the facility is operated. vii. Development of, and changes to, operating procedures for managing all stages of incidents and accidents, including severe accidents. viii. Design of, and changes to, operator-training programmes for management of incidents and accidents, including severe accidents. ix. Off-site emergency planning and response including a demonstration of the effectiveness of countermeasures. x. Evaluation of the risk significance of the abnormal occurrences at the facility and identification of measures to avoid future recurrences of safety significant events. In addition to the above, PSA can and should provide valuable information to ONR inspectors in the following (see Ref 6.6): a. Understanding the safety significance of the issues under consideration by the Office for Nuclear Regulation, e.g. modifications being assessed or events under investigation. b. Focusing inspection activities on those areas (systems, components, features, etc.) with the highest safety significance. c. Understanding the safety significance of inspection findings. d. Assisting in forming a judgement towards the adequacy of licensees’ demonstration of meeting SAP Numerical Targets 5 and 6. 2) Technical adequacy of PSA applications For the PSA to be an effective tool to support decision making, not only should the quality of the PSA be adequate (in line with SAP FA.13) but also the way in which the PSA is used should be appropriate, i.e. PSA studies performed to support any safety submission, including the justification of any modification to plant or operation, should be comprehensive, technically sound and properly documented. In this regard: i. Any issue that is going to be evaluated using PSA (e.g. a facility design or operational feature, a proposed change to the design, or an event at the facility) should be explicitly defined together with the type of results required as input to the decision-making, including any numerical criteria that need to be met. ii. All aspects of the PSA model and data potentially affected by the issue under study should be identified, evaluated for impact and modified if necessary. iii. All the assumptions should be checked for validity against the issue under study and modified if appropriate. iv. Sensitivity analyses should be carried out to estimate the sensitivity of the risk to changes in relevant assumptions and areas of modelling uncertainty, to check the risk impact of different options under consideration and to carry out ‘what if’ analyses if appropriate. The results of the sensitivity analyses should be used to inform the decision-making process. v. Uncertainty analyses should be carried out vi. Based on the results of the sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, the dutyholder should show that the most important modelling and parametric Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 9 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation uncertainties have been minimised, or that the results of the application are not affected by these uncertainties, or that the decision based on the results of the application takes account of the uncertainties by adopting the precautionary principle (as described in paragraphs 89 and the following ones of R2P2, Ref 6.5). vii. The issue under study could potentially affect aspects of the risk not covered within the scope of the existing PSA. These limitations in the PSA in relation to the issue under evaluation should be recognised and identified explicitly. In order to perform a comprehensive risk analysis the PSA models should be extended and/or enhanced to cover the missing aspects. If this is not practicable (e.g. due to time constraints), the risk impact of the issue associated with areas outside the scope of the existing PSA should be analysed qualitatively. viii. The outcome of the PSA studies performed to evaluate issues should be clear, comprehensive and traceable and should provide recommendations based on a systematic application of decision-making criteria applied to the results of the PSA evaluations. 4.8 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Theoretical models – AV.1 “Theoretical models should adequately represent the facility and site” Theoretical models are used throughout the PSA, e.g., reliability models (including CCF and human reliability models), models for the evaluation of the thermal-hydraulic or chemical behaviour, the progression of the accident and the transport of fission products, models for the analysis of structural integrity of containment and any other structures, models for the evaluation of the impact of the various isotopes on human health, etc. SAP AV.1 is strongly linked to AV.2 discussed below and together aim to ensure that all the calculations that underlay the PSA are adequate to represent the facility. In this respect, these SAPs reinforce specific PSA SAPs FA.11 and FA.13 above. 4.9 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Calculation methods – AV.2 “Calculation methods used for the analyses should adequately represent the physical and chemical processes taking place” Calculation methods are used in support of various tasks in PSA, e.g. thermal- hydraulic analyses, analyses of chemical behaviour, accident progression analyses, analysis of structural integrity of containment and any other structures, fission product release and transport, analysis of health effects, etc. PSA software, in itself, uses a calculation algorithm to quantify the PSA models and to obtain the list of cutsets. The aim of this principle is to ensure that all the calculation methods used in the PSA adequately represent the real processes taking place in the facility and that the calculations are done as intended by the analysts. For this, inspectors should satisfy themselves that the calculation algorithms have been validated with actual experience, experiments, tests or other calculation methods. Inspectors should also seek evidence that uncertainties in the calculation methods used have been recognised by the dutyholder and that methods have only been applied within their limit of applicability. As deemed appropriate, inspectors may wish to consider undertaking (or commissioning) independent calculations for some aspects of the PSA (e.g., addressing areas of particular concern) using different calculation methods. This is particularly important if the PSA is being used to support a new design. TAG NS-TAST-GD-042 (Ref 7.7) should be referred to for further guidance. 4.10 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Use of data – AV.3 Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 10 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation “The data used in the analysis of aspects of plant performance with safety significance should be shown to be valid for the circumstances by reference to established physical data, experiment or other appropriate means” Failure rate and probability data is the basis of the PSA; therefore, for the PSA to be an adequate representation of the facility, it should make use of data that can be demonstrated to be valid for the facility. The use of data in PSA has been discussed in Section 4.6 (3) above. Section 4.6 (4) has also discussed the need to evaluate the uncertainty in the input data and its impact on the overall PSA results. Section 4.7 (2) has addressed how to interpret this uncertainty in decision-making. Therefore, this SAP is viewed as a reinforcement of specific PSA SAPs FA.13 and FA.14. Data about physical processes is also an input to PSA supporting calculations. Such data should be justified by reference to physical data, experiment or other appropriate means. See also 4.11. 4.11 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Computer models – AV.4 “Computer models and datasets used in support of the safety analysis should be developed, maintained and applied in accordance with quality management procedures” Computer models are developed to support various tasks in PSA, e.g. for derivation of success criteria, accident progression analyses, fission product release and transport, analysis of structural integrity of containment and any other structures, etc. The PSA itself comprises a computer model and an associated database. Therefore, the relevance of this SAP cannot be stressed enough. The aim of this principle is to ensure that all the calculations that underlay the PSA are undertaken without error. For this, inspectors may wish to satisfy themselves that the dutyholders have put in place adequate procedures to develop, maintain and apply computer models and databases. These procedures should cover verification, validation or qualification of computer codes, as appropriate, for the specific design of the facility. The procedures should also require the dutyholder to identify the degree of accuracy and uncertainties associated with the selected computer codes and to ensure that the codes are only used within their limit of applicability and by adequately trained users. In addition, the procedures should require the dutyholder to ensure that the modelling of the plant inputted as underlying basis for the calculations and the input data files are auditable and are verified. Inspectors may choose to review or audit these procedures and/or seek evidence of their correct application by the dutyholder. Generally inspectors should expect that the Quality Assurance process applied to the PSA covers all items identified in SAP AV.4. Further guidance on the use of computer models in safety cases is provided in NS-TAST-GD-042 (Ref 7.7). 4.12 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Documentation – AV.5 “Documentation should be provided to facilitate review of the adequacy of the analytical models and data” PSAs are generally large and complex safety analyses. Therefore, for them to be traceable, reproducible, verifiable and updatable, they need to be documented in such a way as to ensure that each aspect of the PSA can be directly related to existing facility information, facility documentation or the analysts’ assumptions in the absence of such information. In this respect this SAP reinforces PSA-specific SAP FA.11 (Validity) addressed above. Good practice on PSA documentation can be found in IAEA TECDOC on Living PSA (Ref 6.4). This report recommends that, as part of the PSA documentation, individual Task Procedures should be developed to ensure that all analysts working on a task develop a consistent set of models which interface without overlap or omission. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 11 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation Inspectors may choose to review or audit these procedures, if available, to gain confidence on the consistent application of methods throughout the PSA. Ref 6.4 also recommends that for each PSA task, analysis files should be compiled including relevant reports, input data, relevant calculations, and model or database files containing task results. The PSA task reports: should describe the analyses performed and all the modelling assumptions; should identify interfaces with other tasks; and should list all the references used. These analysis files should be controlled documents which are maintained for the life of the facility. They enable any PSA analyst familiar with the particular task to recreate, modify or review the particular part of the PSA. Experience with large PSA models suggest that unless there is a complete set of such files, it is very difficult to define and understand each element of the computer model and the results of its quantification. 4.13 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Sensitivity analyses – AV.6 “Studies should be carried out to determine the sensitivity of the analysis (and the conclusions drawn from it) to the assumptions made, the data used and the methods of calculation” Sensitivity analyses are a key aspect of the PSA because they are needed to provide confidence that the conclusions obtained from the PSA are valid despite the uncertainties associated with the supporting analysis and assumptions used in the development of the PSA. If the sensitivity analyses performed do not provide sufficient confidence in the validity of the conclusions of the PSA, reasonably practicable steps need to be taken to reduce the uncertainties associated with the model and data – this may include use of independent methods and computer codes, where appropriate, as indicated in the text accompanying SAP AV.6. Sensitivity analyses have been addressed in Section 4.6 (4). In addition, Section 4.7 (2) discusses the role of sensitivity analyses when using PSA to support decision- making. Therefore, this SAP reinforces specific PSA SAPs FA.13 and FA.14. 4.14 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Data collection – AV.7 “Data should be collected throughout the operating life of the facility to check or update the safety analysis” The validity and applicability of the IE frequencies, component failure probabilities, unavailabilities, etc, used in the PSA can only be assured if these are reviewed periodically using facility specific information. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect dutyholders to put systems in place for collecting relevant data throughout the life of the facility and to use this data every time the PSA is updated as required e.g. by PSA SAP FA.11 (above) and Assurance of Validity SAP AV.8 (below). 4.15 Fault analysis: assurance of validity of data and models – Update and review – AV.8 “The safety analysis should be updated where necessary and reviewed periodically” Licence Condition 15 requires the licensees to conduct periodic reviews of the safety cases for their facilities. These periodic safety reviews (PSRs) are normally carried out every ten years. However a licensee's arrangements under LC15 should also require interim reviews on a shorter term basis taking into account the number and safety significance of modifications to the facility and/or changes to the safety case since the previous review (See NS-TAST-GD-050, Ref 7.9). AV.8 should also be interpreted as highlighting the principle of Living PSA, in that ONR expects PSAs to be living analyses that constantly reflect the best estimate of the dutyholder on the reliability of components, plant availability etc, current knowledge on Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 12 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation plant behaviour, and modern analysis methods. In this regard, this principle reinforces the specific PSA principle FA.11 discussed above. It is expected that review by the facility operators will identify if operating experience has proved to be significantly different from the assumptions in the analyses and then take action to ensure that risks remain ALARP. The frequency at which an updating or reconsideration of the PSA should be carried out will depend upon a number of factors, e.g. related to the systems that are in place to collect and analyse data and to the understanding of ageing effect and trends in system reliability. Dutyholders are expected to evaluate the impact of modifications (design, procedures, operating practices, etc.) on the PSA results on a case-by-case basis. Some modifications may therefore require the PSA to be immediately updated. IAEA TECDOC on Living PSA (Ref 6.4) indicates that it is a good practice at operating NPPs not to accumulate a backlog of such evaluations for a period longer than a year. It also suggests that, even if risk-significant modifications do not arise for a longer period, the dutyholder should still revise, update and formally amend the PSA every three years. 4.16 Target 7: Individual risk to people off the site from accidents “The targets for the individual risk of death to a person off the site, from accidents at the site resulting in exposure to ionising radiation, are: BSL: 1 x 10-4 pa BSO: 1 x 10-6 pa” Target 7 address accident risks to the public, summed for all facilities on a site. 4.17 Target 8: Frequency dose targets for accidents on an individual facility – any person off the site “The targets for the total predicted frequencies of accidents on an individual facility, which could give doses to a person off the site are: Effective dose, mSv Total predicted frequency per annum 0.1-1 1-10 10-100 100-1000 >1000 BSL 1 BSO 1 x 10-2 1 x 10-1 1 x 10-3 1 x 10-2 1 x 10-4 1 x 10-3 1 x 10-5 1 x 10-4 1 x 10-6” Target 8 sets limits on the frequencies of classes of accidents at individual facilities that could give rise to doses off the site within the specified bands. 4.18 Target 9: Total risk of 100 or more fatalities “The targets for the total risk of 100 or more fatalities, either immediate or eventual, from accidents at the site in exposure to ionising radiation, are: BSL: BSO: 1 x 10-5 pa 1 x 10-7 pa” Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 13 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation Target 9 is intended to be used as a guide to assist in judging whether more detailed analysis is warranted. As with other numerical targets, Target 9 is a pragmatic approach to enable targeted and proportionate use of resources. ALARP considerations by dutyholders below the BSO should, however, not be ruled out. 4.19 Relationship with the WENRA Reference Levels The Reactor Harmonization Working Group of the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) published Reactor Safety Reference Levels in January 2007 and revised versions in January 2008 and most recently September 2014. Issue O of this document refers to Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA). This TAG is consistent with Issue O of the WENRA reference levels. Appendix 2 presents the mapping between Issue O of the WENRA reference levels and this TAG. 4.20 Relationship with the IAEA Standards Key relevant IAEA publications on PSA are listed in Sections 6, 8, A1-4 and A1-5. The contents of this TAG, including its Appendix 1, are broadly consistent with those IAEA publications. In particular, Refs [6.4, A1-5.6 and A1-5.10] and the IAEA Specific Safety Guides on Level 1 and Level 2 PSA, Refs [A1-5.7 and A1-5.8] have been specifically used for the preparation of Appendix 1 of the TAG. 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 5.1 Introduction This section of the TAG aims to provide guidance on the assessment of a PSA which generally is associated with SAPs FA.10 to FA.14. The guidance in this section is presented in the order of a typical PSA as this is likely to be of more practical value to the inspectors. This section is split up into a number of parts dealing with the different elements of a PSA. Each part is made up of a number of specific points of guidance to ONR inspectors. It should be noted that all of these points need not be met fully in each and every instance. It is left to the judgement of the individual inspector to identify both the scope of assessment and which, if any, of the shortfalls are significant. The guidance provided in this section is generally applicable to the assessment of PSAs for all types of nuclear facilities. However, more specific and detailed assessment expectations for review of PSAs for NPPs are given in Appendix 1 to this TAG. Since much of the guidance provided in Appendix 1 can also be applied to other types of facilities, inspectors may wish to use Appendix 1 at their discretion for the assessment of PSAs for facilities other than NPPs. 1) PSA should be a systematic analysis to identify all important fault sequences which can lead to radiological consequences and to evaluate their contribution to the level of risk represented by the facility. The PSA should set out to identify all the significant contributions to the estimate of the level of risk otherwise the analysis is not complete and conclusions drawn from the analysis may thus be incorrect. 2) The same expectation of scope for PSAs is, in principle, applicable to both old and new facilities. However, the methods and details of analysis that licensees choose to use to demonstrate that the level of risk from their facility is ALARP may be different. 3) The inspector may consider: i. in cases where there is currently no PSA, whether producing one would be worthwhile; 5.2 PSA Scope Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 14 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ii. in cases where there is a PSA, whether the objectives of the analysis are appropriate and its scope adequate to meet them; iii. whether the scope of the PSA covers all the sources of radioactivity on the facility; iv. whether the scope of the PSA allows a meaningful comparison to be made with the numerical targets of the SAPs; v. whether the scope of the PSA covers all classes of IEs and hazards; vi. whether the scope of the PSA covers all foreseeable operating modes of the facility; vii. whether any reductions in scope of the PSA from the above pointers are identified; viii. whether, where the scope of the PSA has been reduced, a justification is provided to confirm that this would not change the conclusions of the PSA; ix. in the case of a site with multiple reactors or facilities, whether the scope of the PSA is well defined (e.g. for a single representative unit, or multiple units or facilities), and whether the justification for scope is provided and adequate (additional discussion on multi-unit considerations is contained in Section 5.13). 4) Specific assessment expectations for review of the scope of the PSA for NPPs can be found in Table A1-1.2 (PSA Scope) of Appendix 1. 5.3 PSA Methodology 1) The starting point for the PSA is a detailed description of the design and operation of the facility and its associated protection system, and their behaviour in fault conditions. This would typically include facility descriptions, fault schedules, drawings, operating instructions, safety reports and transient, radiological and any other deterministic analyses that support the PSA. 2) The inspector may consider whether: i. the detailed design of the facility and its equipment to which the PSA refers is identified; ii. sufficient information is provided on the design and operation of the facility and on its behaviour in fault conditions to support the PSA. (The inspector should consider carrying out a site visit(s) to confirm a selection of design and operating assumptions used in the PSA); iii. the methods of analysis used in the PSA are defined and are suitable to meet the objectives of the analysis; iv. the PSA has been fully documented; v. the PSA has been carried out in accordance with written QA procedures; vi. the PSA has undergone an independent assessment/peer review and the findings are acceptable. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy of the documentation provided in support of each technical task of the PSAs for NPPs can be found in the various Tables of Appendix 1. 5.4 Derivation of Initiating Events Including Hazards 1) A list should be included providing identification of all of the identifiable IEs within the scope of the PSA which could lead directly or in combination with other failures to a release of radioactive material. 2) The inspector may consider whether: Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 15 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation i. the list of IEs covers all the sources of radioactive material in the facility; ii. the quantity, form and location of all radioactive material in the facility is identified; iii. if any sources of radioactive material are not included in the PSA, justification is given that this would not lead to a significant contribution to the risk; iv. the list of IEs covers all the operating modes of the facility; v. if any operating mode is not covered in the list of IEs, justification is given that the contribution to the risk is small during this operating mode; vi. the IE identification process is shown to be comprehensive so that all possible IEs are identified; vii. the list of IEs includes partial failures as well as total failure; viii. all relevant internal hazards are listed; ix. all relevant external hazards are listed; x. each IE is defined; xi. the causes of each IE are identified; xii. features such as administrative systems, control systems, interlocks etc. which limit the frequency of an IE are identified; xiii. failures of protection system equipment which can occur as a consequence of an IE are identified; xiv. a list is prepared of IEs which are screened from the list of IEs because of very low frequency or "incredibility", with reference to the justification; xv. full records of the IE identification process are available and are of suitable quality; xvi. any IE screening criteria adopted are clearly described and justified. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy and completeness of the list of IEs considered in the PSAs for NPPs can be found in Tables A1-2.1 (identification and grouping of initiating events), A1-2.7 (analysis of hazards) and A1- 2.8 (low power and shutdown modes) of Appendix 1. 5.5 Protection and Mitigation Systems 1) The PSA should identify the safety systems which are required to operate for each of the IEs and identify the success criteria for each of the safety functions. 2) The inspector may consider whether for each IE: i. the safety functions have been identified; ii. the minimum safety systems requirements to achieve the safety functions have been identified; iii. the minimum protection system requirements are consistent with any deterministic / transient analysis presented; iv. for automatic protection actions, the parameters and systems used to initiate the action have been identified; v. for manually initiated protection actions, the alarms and indications which would alert the operator to the need for the action are identified. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy of the credited safeguards in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.2 (Accident sequence development: determination of success criteria) of Appendix 1. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 16 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.6 Accident Sequence Analysis 1) The next stage of the PSA is the accident sequence analysis which models the behaviour of the facility for the IEs. The analysis should cover all possible combinations of success or failure of the protection systems to perform the safety functions and should identify the accident sequences which involve failure to maintain the facility within safe limits. 2) The end points of the accident sequence analysis should be categorised in terms compatible with the numerical targets of the SAPs addressed. This does not necessarily mean that the categories defined by the dutyholders have to be identical to those corresponding to the numerical targets of the SAPs. However, safety cases should be presented in a manner which allows inspectors to make judgements against the SAPs’ targets. The inspector may check that, for each IE: i. the accident sequence analysis covers all the safety functions required and all the combinations of protection system equipment which can operate to perform the safety functions; ii. the accident sequence analysis takes account of all the functional dependencies between safety functions and protection systems; iii. the accident sequence analysis covers all the mechanisms which could lead to failure of the physical barriers such as a reactor pressure vessel or the containment; iv. the accident sequence analysis covers the factors which affect the release and transport of radioactive materials to the environment and their effects on humans; v. sufficient radiological analysis is available to justify the categorisation of the end-points of that best-estimate assumptions have been made; the accident sequence analysis or vi. the transient, radiological and other deterministic analyses used to support the PSA models do not contain undue pessimisms (these should preferably be best estimate); vii. where IEs are grouped, the frequency is the sum of the individual IEs grouped and the group is represented by the most onerous one. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the adequacy of the grouping of IEs in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.1 of Appendix 1. Specific assessment expectations for review of the accident sequence analysis in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.3 of Appendix 1. 5.7 Protection and Mitigation Systems Failure Analysis 1) The accident sequence analysis identifies combinations of IEs and failures of safety systems and then considers the failures of these systems down to a lower level to identify the combinations of basic events within the various safety systems or support systems which could lead to the failure. The basic events would typically include; component failure, CCF, component unavailability during maintenance or test and operator error. 2) The most usual method of safety system analysis is fault tree analysis; other techniques are acceptable but may need additional scrutiny. 3) The inspector may consider whether: i. the systems failure analysis covers all the failure states identified by the accident sequence analysis; Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 17 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ii. the analysis has been carried out to a low enough level of detail (e.g. individual component level) so that the design and operation of the system is adequately modelled; iii. all the relevant failure modes of protection system equipment have been included; iv. where components have been grouped together in the analysis (e.g. in “super-components”), failure of each of the components in the mode specified has the same effect on the system and justification is clearly documented; v. the systems failure analysis models all the support systems required and that all interdependencies due to common services have been represented; vi. the systems failure analysis takes account of consequential failures which could occur due to the IE or hazard; vii. CCFs are included in the models at an appropriate level and that the probability given to each CCF has been derived on a best-estimate basis; viii. all operator errors which can contribute to the failure of a system credited in the PSA have been identified and modelled in the analysis, with due consideration of dependencies; ix. the unavailability of components, trains of systems or the entirety of systems during periods of maintenance or testing has been addressed in the analysis. 4) Specific assessment expectations for review of the System Analysis in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.4 of Appendix 1. 5.8 PSA Input Data 1) Data is required to estimate the frequencies and probabilities in the PSA. 2) The inspector may consider whether: i. data is provided for all the basic events and IE frequencies included in the PSA; ii. the data provided is preferably best estimate and appropriate for the use made of it in the PSA; iii. where use is made of operating experience data in calculating IE frequencies and component failure rates, and the event is a potentially important contributor to the risk, there is an adequate discussion of the relevance of the data and the statistical uncertainty; iv. where insufficient directly relevant data are available, the source of any quoted generic data and the basis of any judgements are stated; v. for IE frequencies: a. the data covers all the causes of the IEs which have been identified; b. where the IE frequency has been calculated from failure data for the causes of the fault, the data is applicable for this use and has been combined correctly to derive the frequency; c. where no relevant operating data is available and judgement has been used to assign the IE frequency, the basis for this judgement has been stated and shown to be valid, as far as possible; vi. for component failure rates (or probabilities): a. the boundaries of the component for which the data is specified are defined; b. the data covers all relevant failure modes of the component; Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 18 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation c. the data used corresponds to the component in terms of type, manufacture, operating environment, usage and maintenance regime; d. the form of the data is suitable - that is, a failure rate per unit time or a failure probability per demand is given as appropriate for running or standby components; e. where a test interval is used to change a failure rate per unit time to a failure probability per demand, there should be a reference to the relevant testing schedule and procedures; f. where a component is required to operate continuously after a fault, the required period of operation is defined and justified by reference to the supporting deterministic analysis; vii. for component unavailabilities: a. the data covers all causes of component unavailability including tests (scheduled and unscheduled), maintenance (scheduled and unscheduled) and repair; b. justification is given that the frequency and duration of the component unavailabilities adequately represents typical facility operation; viii. for CCFs: a. the probability of failure associated with each CCF is derived using best-estimate methods; b. where numerical values are derived through engineering judgement, adequate justification is given that this reflects the potential for common cause failures to occur. The engineering judgement should take account of layout, segregation and any other measures adopted to reduce the likelihood of a common cause failure (see NS-TAST-GD-036, Ref 7.6) ix. operator error probabilities: a. should reflect the complexity of the task required and the factors which may be present which influence the performance of the operator (stress, the time available, training, procedures and environmental conditions); b. where judgements have been made, the basis for the judgement is stated and shown to be valid as far as possible; x. the measures proposed to ensure that the reliabilities claimed for components and systems will be achieved and/or maintained, are stated and evidence is available to demonstrate the adequacy of any such measures; xi. the possibility of component failure rates or unavailabilities increasing with time, e.g. through ageing, is considered. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Data Analysis in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Tables A1-2.5 (Human Reliability Analysis) and A1-2.6 (Data Analysis) of Appendix 1. 5.9 Analysis of Internal and External Hazards 1) Development of internal and external hazard PSA generally follows a similar method to the Level 1 internal events PSA method, i.e.: selection of IE (in this case a particular internal or external hazard); screening and bounding of the IE; accident sequence analysis and systems analysis. As such, the recommendations listed above are generally applicable for both hazard PSA and internal-events PSA. 2) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Analysis of Internal and External Hazards in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.7 of Appendix 1. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 19 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.10 Analysis of Other Operating Modes 1) As stated above, the scope of a PSA is expected to address all operating modes wherein the nuclear facility is expected to operate. The recommendations listed above are generally also applicable for PSA models of operating modes other than ‘at-power’. 2) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Analysis of Low Power and Shutdown Modes in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.8 of Appendix 1. 5.11 Evaluation of Release Frequencies Specific assessment expectations for review of the Level 2 PSA* for NPPs can be found in Table A1-3 of Appendix 1. * For NPPs, Level 1 PSA is the part of the overall PSA that focuses on the potential for core damage; Level 2 PSA widens this analysis to consider release magnitudes and frequencies from losses of containment or otherwise; while Level 3 PSA is wider still, and considers risks to the public from off-site releases. 5.12 Evaluation of Off-site Risks and Consequences Specific assessment expectations for review of the Level 3 PSA for NPPs can be found in Table A1-4 of Appendix 1. 5.13 Multi-unit considerations The majority of existing and proposed nuclear sites in the UK contain multiple reactor units or other facilities. Whilst the topic of multi-unit PSA is a topic of ongoing international research, dutyholders are expected to consider the impact of multiple reactor units and other facilities within the PSA. For existing sites with limited dependencies between individual facilities this may be limited to a single unit PSA for a representative reactor unit or facility, supported by a justification for this approach providing a suitable and sufficient PSA to support the expected PSA applications. For a new build site, or a site with significant or complex interactions between facilities, more detailed analysis may be required. ONR has an open research item on multi-unit PSA and provides a representative on OECD/NEA WGRISK and IAEA working groups for multi-unit PSA research topics. Further advice may be sought from inspectors involved in the ONR and international multi-unit PSA research topics as required. The following provides some general advice to inspectors on the different aspects of PSA relevant to multi-unit considerations: 1) 2) PSA scope. As stated in Section 4.5, the scope of the PSA is expected to cover all significant sources of radioactivity on site. The presence of multiple reactor units and other facilities on a site should be taken into account when developing and justifying the scope of the PSA. PSA methodologies. There are a number of options available to dutyholders when considering multiple reactor units or facilities within the PSA. This may extend from justification that a single unit model adequately represents the site, all the way to a fully integrated multi-unit PSA covering all sources of radioactivity on site, and various steps in-between. There are advantages and disadvantages to the different approaches, depending upon the complexity of the site, the dependencies between the facilities, and the level of risk for the site. The approach taken should be suitable to understand the risk and develop a suitable and sufficient PSA to support the expected PSA applications. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 20 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 3) 4) 5) 6) 7) 8) Initiating events. Initiating events which affect multiple units or facilities should be considered and analysed. Initiating events which propagate between units or facilities should also be considered and analysed. Accident sequence analysis. Dependencies and the potential for propagation between units and facilities should be identified and suitably considered in the PSA. This may include safety systems, support systems, control systems, operator actions, CCFs, phenomenology, and radiological consequences. The potential for a radiological release at one facility to impact the operator response on an adjacent facility should be considered. Input data. Data used in the PSA model or any multi-unit sensitivity studies may be impacted by the scope of the PSA, including CCFs, operator actions and initiating event frequencies. Data used in any multi-unit PSA models or studies should be documented and justified. Internal hazards. The potential for propagation of internal hazards between units and facilities should be considered. This may include tasks such as extending the fire PSA multi compartment analysis to consider adjacent facilities. External hazards. Many external hazards have the potential to impact multiple facilities on the same site. External hazard prioritisation and external hazards PSA models or sensitivity analysis should include consideration of all facilities which may be affected by the external hazard. Additional analysis for seismic PSA may be required to consider the potential for correlation between SSCs in different facilities. Evaluation of off-site consequences. Additional consequence analysis may be required to evaluate the consequences of a multi-unit accident. For example, a seismic event may be considered to lead to a release on multiple similar facilities, with a similar or higher frequency than a single unit release, and therefore additional consequence analysis should be performed. 9) Quantification and presentation of results. PSA results should be quantified, aggregated and presented in a suitable way to allow for comparison against SAPs numerical targets, understanding of sensitivity and uncertainty, demonstration of risks being reduced to ALARP and use of PSA results to support the expected PSA applications. 10) Interpretation of numerical targets. SAPs Numerical Targets 7 and 9 relate to site-wide risk, and therefore assessment against Numerical Targets 7 and 9 should include consideration of all facilities on the site. The SAPs contain a definition for societal risk (Target 9) which refers to “an activity from which risk is assessed as a whole and is under the control of one company in one location, or within a site boundary”. SAPs Numerical Target 8 relates to risk from a facility. The SAPs define a facility as “A part of a nuclear site identified as being a separate unit for the purposes of nuclear or radiological risk”. From a PSA point of view, dutyholders are expected to define the boundaries of each facility for the purposes of assessment against Target 8. This definition should include consideration of dependencies. For example, where facilities are coupled or connected, or multiple reactors are contained in close proximity within the same building or the same body of water they may be considered the same facility for the purposes of assessment against Target 8. 5.14 Quantification of the Analysis Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 21 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1) The PSA should determine the combinations of basic events such as component failure, CCF, operator error and plant unavailability which lead to the fault sequence and determine its frequency of occurrence. The methods used to do this should be identified and shown to be adequate. Due to the complexity of the analysis, the quantification of the PSA normally requires a computer program. This code should be quality assured (see AV.4) and the evidence of this should be provided by the dutyholder (AV.5). 2) The inspector may consider whether: i. where computer programs are used, they and their results are verified, manual calculations should have been the dutyholder; independently checked by ii. the combinations of basic events (minimal cutsets) which lead to failure of the protection or support systems are identified and listed for each of the IEs analysed; iii. that single order minimal cutsets are identified and brought to the attention of the assessors dealing with compliance with the single failure criteria; iv. the combinations of basic events do lead to the protection system failure (for this, inspectors should review a sample of the cutsets including those which make the highest contributions to the frequency/probability calculated); v. if the quantification of the analysis has required a restriction to be applied on the probability of the combinations of basic events included, this has not affected the accuracy of the analysis significantly; vi. in the calculation, all dependencies are taken into account. This includes the dependency between redundant components, between nominally diverse systems and between individual operator errors. Dependencies due to common support systems should be modelled explicitly in the analysis; vii. the importance of IEs, components, systems, operator errors and dependencies in the calculation of the risk have been identified. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Quantification of PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.9.2 of Appendix 1. 5.15 Sensitivity and Uncertainty Studies 1) The results of the probabilistic analysis may be sensitive to the assumptions made and the data used. Since these contain some uncertainty, studies should be carried out to determine the degree of sensitivity to ensure that the conclusions drawn from the analysis are still valid in the light of these uncertainties (AV.6). These sensitivity studies should cover a sufficiently wide range of conditions to give confidence in the accuracy of the results of the analysis and the conclusions drawn from it. Standard importance functions may be used to identify the critical basic events to be covered by the sensitivity studies, as well as providing the means by which the impact to the risk can be gauged. 2) The inspector may check that: i. appropriate studies have been carried out to determine the sensitivity of the results of the PSA to any significant uncertainties in the models, assumptions and data; ii. as far as the basic event data is concerned, the error factors used are justified, systematically assigned and are a reasonable representation of the uncertainty. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Sensitivity and Uncertainty Analyses in PSAs for NPPs can be found in Table A1-2.9.1 of Appendix 1. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 22 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.16 Presentation of the Results of the PSA 1) The results of the PSA should be presented in a form which allows comparison with the numerical targets of the SAPs and the dutyholder's own criteria. 2) The inspector may consider: i. whether sufficient information is provided to allow ONR to make a comparison with the SAPs; ii. the extent to which the results of the PSA meet the numerical target in the SAPs; iii. whether suitable judgements have been made, where possible, of the magnitude of ‘excluded’ contributions to the risk in relation to those calculated in the PSA; iv. whether the results of the PSA have been reviewed systematically to determine if changes could be made to the design or operation of the facility to make the risks as low as reasonably practicable – see ONR’s ALARP guidance, NS-TAST-GD-005 (Ref 7.1). v. whether, in cases where changes to the design or operation of the facility are proposed, the corresponding reduction in the risk has been calculated. 3) Specific assessment expectations for review of the Results of the PSAs for NPPs can be found in Tables A1-2.9 (Level 1 PSA), A1-3.6 (Level 2 PSA), A1-4.2 (Level 3 PSA) and A1-5 (Overall conclusions from the PSA) of Appendix 1. 6. REFERENCES (GENERAL) 6.1 ONR, Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities, 2014 Edition. 6.2 6.3 6.4 US NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Handbook of Parameter Estimation for Probabilistic Risk Assessment, NUREG/CR-6823 (2002) BEDFORD, T, COOKE, R, Probabilistic Risk Analysis – Foundations and Methods, Cambridge University Press (2001) INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Living Probabilistic Safety Assessment (PSA), IAEA-TECDOC-1106, IAEA, Vienna (1999) 6.5 HSE, Reducing Risks and Protecting People – HSE’s Decision Making Process, 2001 6.6 ONR, Risk informed regulatory decision making, 2017 7. REFERENCES (TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT GUIDES, TAGS) 7.1 NS-TAST-GD-005, Guidance on the demonstration of ALARP. 7.2 NS-TAST-GD-011, The single failure criterion. 7.3 NS-TAST-GD-063, Human reliability analysis. 7.4 NS-TAST-GD-016, Integrity of metal components and structures. 7.5 NS-TAST-GD-017, Civil engineering. 7.6 NS-TAST-GD-036, Diversity, redundancy, segregation and layout of mechanical plant. 7.7 NS-TAST-GD-042, Validation of computer codes and calculation methods. 7.8 NS-TAST-GD-046, Computer based safety systems. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 23 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 7.9 NS-TAST-GD-050, Periodic Safety Reviews (PSRs). 7.10 NS-TAST-GD-051, The purpose, scope and content of safety cases. 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.4 (See also list of References and Bibliography of Appendix 1) INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Procedures for Conducting Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Non-Reactor Nuclear Facilities, IAEA TECDOC- 1267, IAEA, Vienna (2002) INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, A Framework for a Quality Assurance Programme for PSA, IAEA-TECDOC-1101, IAEA, Vienna (1999). INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IPERS Guidelines for the International Peer Review Service. Second Edition. Procedures for Conducting Independent Peer Reviews of Probabilistic Safety Assessments, IAEA-TECDOC-832, IAEA, Vienna (1995). INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dependability Assessment of Software for Safety Instrumentation and Control Systems at NPPs, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series NP-T-3.27, IAEA, Vienna (2018) 9. APPENDIX 1 - NS-TAST-GD-030 – ASSESSMENT EXPECTATIONS FOR REVIEW OF PSAS FOR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS A1-1 Introductory note A1-1.1 This Appendix provides detailed guidance on the assessment of PSA specific for Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs). This is presented in the form of a Table of Assessment Expectations for different stages in the lifecycle of a nuclear power plant, i.e. PSAs submitted for generic design assessment (GDA), site licensing, reactor commissioning and to support NPP operation. Inspectors should bear in mind that much of the guidance provided in Appendix 1 can also be applied to other types of installations. A1-1.2 There is an expectation that dutyholders will present the PSA analysis within a framework compatible with good industry practices. For NPPs this suggests a traditional Level 1, 2, 3 PSA framework as presented in IAEA Guidance (Refs A1-4.1 – A1-4.4). Inspectors will gain confidence in the acceptability of risk from the facility and ALARP compliance by reviewing the facility risk level against the numerical targets of the SAPs and the probabilistic criteria proposed by INSAG (Ref A1-4.5), which implies a need to calculate the appropriate risk figures of merit including core damage frequency and large release frequency. A1-1.3 However, in order to address the relevant numerical targets of the SAPs, dutyholders will also need to identify and study those sequences that have a higher frequency but lower radiological consequence. As an example, in PWRs, Steam Generator Tube Rupture sequences without core damage could lead to releases in the lower dose bands of Numerical Target 8 of the SAPs. The guidance in this Appendix does not specifically cover assessment expectations for PSA studies addressing release categories for non-core damage sequences. ONR prefers that dutyholders present the PSAs for NPPs in the traditional Level 1, 2, 3 PSA framework as discussed above, addressing release categories for non-core damage sequences separately. A1-1.4 Other aspects not specifically covered by the guidance in this Appendix include worker risk and risk from facilities at the NPP other than the nuclear reactor. Nevertheless, these risks need to be evaluated by the dutyholders in order to address the relevant numerical targets of the SAPs. A1-2 Not used Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 24 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation A1-3 Use of this Appendix A1-3.1 The Tables in this Appendix present check lists of items that inspectors should generally expect to see when assessing the different areas of the PSAs for nuclear reactors. The aim is to address all key aspects of modern PSA for nuclear reactors to help inspectors to assess, raise comments, questions and issues in a focused and systematic fashion, and, finally, judge the adequacy of each feature of the PSAs submitted by the dutyholders. A1-3.2 Although an attempt has been made to make this appendix comprehensive, it is only meant for guidance and by no means should be taken to imply that inspectors have no discretion when choosing the scope and depth of the assessment to be undertaken. A1-3.3 In addition, it should be stressed that is not the intention of Appendix 1 to prescribe specific methods and approaches for conducting PSA for NPPs. Dutyholders may choose to use alternative methods to those covered in this appendix as long as they are shown to lead to equally valid outcomes. In cases where the PSA or specific areas of it have been undertaken using alternative approaches, inspectors, should review on a case-by-case basis and judge each on its own merits. A1-3.4 This Appendix can be used in a more prescriptive manner when commissioning PSA assessment work (to be done on behalf of ONR) from external contractors. In such cases, inspectors may wish to restrict the use of discretion by the contractor and/or specify the scope and depth of assessment. A1-4 References A1-4.1 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety Assessment and Verification for Nuclear Power Plants, Safety Standards Series, Safety Guide NS-G-1.2, IAEA, Vienna (2001) INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Procedures A1-4.2 for Conducting Probabilistic Safety Assessment of Nuclear Power Plants (Level 1), Safety Series No 50-P-4, IAEA, Vienna (1992) INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Procedures A1-4.3 for Conducting Probabilistic Safety Assessments of Nuclear Power Plants (Level 2): Accident Progression, Containment Analysis and Estimation of Accident Source Terms, Safety Series No. 50-P-8, IAEA, Vienna, 1995 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Procedures A1-4.4 for Conducting Probabilistic Safety Assessments of Nuclear Power Plants (Level 3), IAEA-Safety Series 50-P- 12, IAEA, Vienna (1996). A1-4.5 INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR SAFETY ADVISORY GROUP, Basic Safety Principles for Nuclear Power Plants, 75-INSAG-3 Rev. 1, INSAG-12, IAEA, Vienna (1999) A1-5 Bibliography A1-5.1 AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS, Standard for Probabilistic Risk Assessment for Nuclear Power Plant Applications, ASME RA-S-1.4-2013 (2013) A1-5.2 AMERICAN NUCLEAR SOCIETY, External Events PRA Methodology, American National Standard, ANSI/ANS-58.21-2007 (2007) A1-5.3 EPRI/NRC-RES, Fire PRA Methodology for Nuclear Power Facilities, NUREG/CR- 6850 (2005) A1-5.4 AMERICAN NUCLEAR SOCIETY, Fire PRA Methodology, American National Standard, ANSI/ANS-58.23-2007 (2007) A1-5.5 EUROPEAN UTILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR LWR NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS, Volume 2: Generic Nuclear Island Requirements – Chapter 17: PSA Methodology, Revision C (2001) Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 25 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Determining A1-5.6 the quality of probabilistic safety assessment (PSA) for applications in nuclear power plants, IAEA- TECDOC-1511, IAEA, Vienna (2006) A1-5.7 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Development and Application of Level 1 Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, Specific Safety Guide No. SSG-3. IAEA, Vienna 2010. A1-5.8 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Development and Application of Level 2 Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, Specific Safety guide No. SSG-4. IAEA, Vienna 2010. A1-5.9 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Probabilistic safety assessments of Nuclear Power Plants for low power and shutdown modes, IAEA-TECDOC-1144, IAEA (2000) A1-5.10 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Review of Probabilistic Safety Assessments by Regulatory Bodies, IAEA-Safety Report Series No 25, IAEA, Vienna (2002) A1-5.11 INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Treatment of Internal Fires in Probabilistic Safety Assessment for Nuclear Power Plants, IAEA Safety Report Series No. 10, IAEA, Vienna (1998) A1-5.12 NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE, Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) Peer Review Process Guidance, NEI 00 02 (2000) A1-5.13 NUCLEAR ENERGY INSTITUTE, Process for Performing Follow on PRA Peer Reviews using the ASME PRA standard, NEI 05-04 (January 2005) A1-6 Table of Assessment Expectations ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? 1. Table A1-1. General Expectations Table A1-1.1 Approaches and methodologies This table lists PSA Assessment Expectations for all the technical areas of Level 1, 2 and 3 PSA. It is not the intention of this guide to prescribe specific methods and approaches for all those technical areas. The dutyholder may choose to use alternative methods to those covered by this table of expectations as long as they lead to equally valid outcomes. In cases where the PSA or specific areas of it have been undertaken using alternative approaches, ONR will review them on a case-by- case basis and judge them on their own merits. External expert support should be sought where necessary. Task procedures have been developed for the individual PSA tasks and these have been provided by the dutyholder. ONR inspectors may wish to assess or audit the PSA task procedures to gain confidence on the general adequacy of the methods and approaches and their implementation, before specific detailed Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 26 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? assessments are undertaken of the various aspects of the PSA models and data. Inspectors may wish to request information on any independent or peer review of the PSA commissioned by the dutyholders (e.g., scope, findings, dutyholder’s action plan to address findings and their status) in order to plan and inform their own assessment. Inspectors may consider requesting the dutyholders to conduct self- assessments against this TAG and provide the results to ONR. Table A1-1.2 PSA Scope The overall risk analysis of the NPP covers all sources of radioactivity at the facility (reactor core, fuel ponds, fuel handling facilities, waste storage tanks, etc). Adequate justification is provided when sources of radioactivity are not included in the scope of the detailed PSA. The PSA covers all types of initiating events (internal events, internal hazards, external hazards). The PSA covers all operational modes. Table A1-1.3 Freeze Date The freeze date for the design and operational features reflected in a particular submission should be explicitly stated. All the PSA models, data, documents and references that support the submission are up-to-date and consistent with the “freeze date”. Table A1-1.4 Computer Codes and Inputs The codes used (e.g. for derivation of success criteria, accident progression analyses, analysis of structural integrity of containment and any other structures, fission product release and transport, consequences on human health, etc) have been verified, validated or qualified, as appropriate. All codes and inputs meet ONR quality expectations as described in SAPs paragraphs 678 ff and NS-TAST-GD-042. The analyses, including the development and operation of the computer codes, have been performed by suitable qualified and experienced analysts. The degree of accuracy, uncertainties and limitations associated with the selected computer codes are identified. The codes have been used within their limit of applicability. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 27 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The modelling (nodalization) of the plant inputted as underlying basis for the code calculations (e.g., thermal-hydraulic, accident progression, structural integrity, etc), is adequate and auditable. The PSA quantification software is capable of quantifying the entire model. The input data files for the code calculations are auditable. The sources of information (e.g. design documents) are identified. Facility-specific and site-specific information are used. If walk downs are used to obtain input data, these are documented in an auditable fashion. ONR holds a license for the PSA quantification software used, or alternative suitable arrangements for PSA quantification by ONR inspectors (or their contractors) are feasible. All computer files for the PSA model/s and reliability database/s have been provided to ONR. Table A1-1.5 Assumptions in the PSA All assumptions made throughout the study are clearly identified, described and properly justified. The specific aspects of the PSA models or data related to these assumptions are clear. A table of assumptions is provided. The PSA may have to make use of assumptions for aspects of the facility not yet available / under development and also when factual information is missing or incomplete – it should be noted, however, that ONR would not consider acceptable the use of assumptions in the PSA in lieu of making use of factual information which is available or can be obtained. A process is in place to capture, track and review assumptions made in the PSA, which could be affected by siting, design and construction, or operational matters (such as procedures, maintenance and testing strategies, training programmes, control room staffing and organisation, etc), which need to be reviewed when detailed information becomes available. The system to capture, track and review PSA assumptions enables the latest available design an operational information to be transferred to the PSA so that assumptions (and models) can be reviewed accordingly. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 28 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? 2. Table A1-2. Level 1 PSA All the criteria used in the Level 1 PSA are defined and are adequate, for example criteria for CORE DAMAGE for the Reactor PSA, criteria for FUEL DAMAGE for the Fuel Route PSA, etc. If design targets for CORE DAMAGE FREQUENCY, FUEL DAMAGE FREQUENCY, etc, have been identified, these are explicitly stated. Table A1-2.1 Identification and Grouping of Initiating Events The task scope is explicitly stated:  For the Reactor PSA, this task addresses all disturbances that require mitigation to prevent core damage and those that lead directly to core damage.  For the Fuel Route PSA, this task addresses all disturbances that require mitigation to prevent fuel damage and those that lead directly to fuel damage. The process used in the identification and definition of initiating events is clear and leads to a systematic and comprehensive identification of initiating events. Detailed records exists of all deductive analyses (e.g. master logic diagrams) and / or inductive analyses (e.g. failure modes and effects analyses) done to identify initiating events. All assumptions are captured. Previous experience at similar NPPs has been searched for and fed back into the initiating event identification process. The source documents used are identified. The applicability of the information extracted and used from these source documents is clear. A database exists of abnormal events and incidents which have led (or could lead) to disruption of normal operation. This includes those equipment failures that led to an initiating event and any consequential failures to perform one or more of the safety functions required. It also includes information on any test or maintenance activity taking place at the time which could be related to the event. A database exists for future recording of abnormal events and incidents which lead (or could lead) to disruption of normal operation. The analysis of the applicability of the initiating events to each operating mode is transparent. Consequential initiating events have been addressed and the way in which they are developed is clear. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 29 of 81 Table A1-2.2 Accident sequence Development: Determination of Success Criteria Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Each initiating event is clearly defined and characterised (i.e. its causes and impact on plant are identified). The process for grouping initiating events is clear, i.e. the grouping criteria and the mapping to derive the final initiating event groups are transparent. Each initiating event group is represented by the most onerous event. The initiating event groups have been defined in a way that vulnerabilities are not masked. Each initiating event group is clearly defined and characterised. The information provided is sufficient for the quantification of initiating event frequencies (i.e. its causes are identified) and for the development of accident sequence models (i.e. its impact on plant is stated). For each initiating event group, the safety functions, the systems which can perform each of the functions, and any need for operator intervention, are identified. The sources and methods used for the derivation of success criteria are transparent. The limiting conditions defined for success / failure (for example, cladding temperature, coolant system pressure, coolant system level, enthalpy in fuel pellets, containment temperature and pressure, etc.) are stated, justified, and are realistic. The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (and any other) analyses used for derivation of success criteria have been performed on a best-estimate basis and are specific to the facility. Sufficient and representative thermal-hydraulic analyses have been performed to demonstrate that each of the success paths depicted in the event trees do indeed lead to successful outcomes (e.g., non core damage). These analyses are available and traceable. Sufficient and representative thermal-hydraulic analyses have been performed to demonstrate that a given system response will prevent the safety limit being exceeded. Timing for operator actions is justified (e.g. by sufficient and representative thermal-hydraulic analyses). The supporting analyses used to define the success criteria for each success sequence in the event trees have adequately addressed the Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 30 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation following: ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET?  If initiating events have been grouped, the most onerous initiator is considered.  Sequence assumptions (e.g., LOCA break location) have been the to be bounding for appropriately chosen and justified sequences depicted in the event trees.  The influence of the physical conditions that arise during the evolution of the sequences on the functionality and operability of the systems and the functions has been taken into consideration in the evaluation of the success criteria  The analyses have considered for each sequence (time required to reach a stable state that can be maintained without the actuation of additional systems) the mission time  Event timings and time window definitions have been adequately treated.  Timings for a manual action at a given header are based on accident sequence modelling which appropriately treats preceding manual actions.  Any conservatisms are identified, and there are no excessive conservatisms.  The use of the codes for each specific application is justified. If use is made of success criteria for the various initiating event groups from sources other than facility-specific analyses, the rationale for this and the analysis of applicability are transparent and the justification is adequate. The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (and any other) analyses used for derivation of success criteria are thoroughly documented and fully traceable. For each success criterion, all applicable items are identified and defined:  Clear definition of exact meaning of ‘success’.  Minimum equipment requirements and performance for success (including mission times)  Details of the specific operator actuations required and latest time for manual actuation which can lead to success (especially considering any prior manual actions). The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset of thermal-hydraulic, neutronics and any other supporting analyses. In these cases no significant errors have been found. The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 31 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? subset of thermal-hydraulic, neutronics and any other supporting analyses. In these cases, the results obtained are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder. Table A1-2.3 Accident Sequence Development: Event Sequence Modelling Table A1-2.3.1 General The general assumptions relating to all event tree development are defined up-front and properly justified. General information is provided on the type of event tree models produced and on the level at which the event tree headings are defined (safety function, system, train). The descriptive text for all event tree headings is clear and consistent (and preferably expressed as functional success, e.g., “Injection of 2oo3 HHSI pumps” or “Operator starts depressurisation”, etc). Sequence end states are identified and defined. Any sequence end-state other than “Success” or “Core Damage” is identified and defined, the rationale for its use explained (including the overall contribution to the conclusions of the PSA). As many event trees as necessary have been constructed so that the PSA model does not have asymmetries artificially built in. This is of upmost importance to ensure the suitability of the PSA to support a number of applications such as Risk Monitoring and those applications based on evaluation of the results of the Importance Analysis All the sequences have been developed to a point in which a safe stable state that can be maintained in the “long-term” without the actuation of additional systems has been achieved. The sequence timings are stated and justified. Sequences in which a safe stable state has not been achieved (within the established timing) have been assigned to Core Damage. The evolution of the sequence of events following the representative initiator from each initiating event group is described. This includes the parameters that cause reactor trip, the signals / channels that initiate various safety functions, and the operators’ intervention in the course of the sequence. The timing of events in the sequence following the success or failure of signals / safety functions are identified and defined. Table A1-2.3.2 Specific for each Initiating Event Group Event Tree Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 32 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? All dependencies (human actions, equipment, environmental, spatial, common mode failure, fluid medium) are identified and the way in which such dependencies have been treated and included in the accident sequences (either explicitly or implicitly) is correct. Analysis to identify subtle dependencies has been carried out and these have been incorporated in the PSA models. Some examples of subtle dependencies are those which may arise between initiating event and the safety functions / systems due to software based control and protection systems, vapour locking of pipes due to high temperature, and other dependencies which may otherwise have been missed. Each heading in the event tree is described, and its relationship to a functional fault tree, system fault tree, human failure event, or other event is identified. When the same event tree heading is used with different boundary conditions for different sequences (e.g., to capture dependencies on the success or failure of preceding event headings), the various boundary conditions for each heading are described. Its relationship, depending on each boundary condition, to one or more functional fault trees, system fault trees, human failure events, or other events is identified. The way in which this is implemented in the modelling is clearly described. The mission time for each heading of each branch of the tree, when applicable, is stated and justified (see SAPs para 652). (Note: The IAEA standard on Level 1 PSA No SSG-3 indicates in paragraph 5.49 says: "The success criteria should specify the mission times for the safety systems, that is, the time that the safety systems will need to operate so that the reactor reaches a safe, stable shutdown state and that will allow for long term measures to be put in place to maintain this state. In many cases this has been taken to be 24 or 48 hrs for most initiating event. For new designs that provide the features to delay core damage, consideration of longer mission time may be necessary" There are more references to mission time in this standard (e.g., paragraph 5.135, 9.28, 9.31, 9.53,). The ASME PRA standard is also clear about this indicating that the end states of the Level 1 PSA have to be a "Steady state condition" at the end of the mission time or "Core Damage") The link between the various headings / nodes of the event tree and the relevant thermal-hydraulic analyses performed to support the event sequence modelling is transparent. The link is clear between the various headings / nodes of the event tree and the relevant operational and emergency procedures to be Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 33 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation used. ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Any basic event used to replace an integrated time dependent function (such as the failure to recover off-site power before a certain time interval has elapsed given that the diesel generators have failed to supply power) is properly described and substantiated. Confirmation is included that potential dependencies have been examined and also explanation of how these have been dealt with (if applicable) included. The treatment of consequential initiators within the event trees is clear, as well as the transfer of the end state of sequences in one tree to initiators in other event trees. Appropriate explanations are included of the functional fault trees developed to link the event tree headings with the system fault trees. The link between the functional fault trees and the relevant success criteria is stated. The functional fault trees are correct. They provide an adequate representation of the functional failures intended. The information required to set up the boundary conditions for the quantification of each sequence is transparent. The event trees have been constructed correctly and provide adequate representations of the evolution of the accident sequences following all the initiating event groups under consideration. Table A1-2.4 Systems Analysis Table A1-2.4.1 General The approach used for the definition of system boundaries is transparent and adequate. The approach used to define component boundaries in the mechanical, I&C and electrical subsystems is transparent and adequate. The general approach applied for the inclusion of unavailabilities due to test and maintenance activities, in the system models is transparent and adequate. The general approach used for the inclusion of pre-accident human failure events (e.g. individual and common cause component misalignments and mis-calibrations of instrument and protection channels) into the system models is clear and adequate. The general approach used for the inclusion of post-accident human failure events (detection, decision errors, omission errors, commission Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 34 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? errors, etc, and common cause human failures) into the system models is clear and adequate. The general approach used for the inclusion of (hardware / software) common cause failure (CCF) events into the system models is clear. The approach is adequate and includes consideration of both intra- system and inter-system CCF events. The general approach applied for the inclusion of structural failures into the system models is clear and adequate. The general approach applied for the inclusion of passive component failures into the system models is clear and adequate. The event naming scheme is clear and consistent throughout the models. Generally applicable modelling assumptions, e.g. those related to inclusion or exclusion of passive components, criteria for inclusion or exclusion of diversion paths, etc, are defined up-front and properly justified. The list of failure modes applicable to each component type is identified up-front and complete. The descriptive text for all fault tree gates and basic events is clear and it is consistently expressed as functional failure, e.g., “2oo3 HHSI pumps fail to inject”, “Pump X fails to start”, etc). A description of the way in which circular logics (also known as logic loops) have been dealt with in the fault tree models is provided and is adequate. The level of detail of the system fault tree models is consistent throughout the system analysis. The level of detail of the fault trees is sufficient to ensure: that they are realistic; that the logic of the models is correct; that all the dependencies are captured; that the resulting cutsets for failures of the system reflect combinations of failures that can be easily understood; and that the data used is applicable to the boundary selected for each component basic event in the PSA. The fault trees do not have asymmetries artificially built in. This is of upmost importance to ensure the suitability of the PSA to support a number of applications such as Risk Monitoring and those applications based on evaluation of the results of Importance Analysis. Table A1-2.4.2 Specific for each System Model Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 35 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? A description of the system is available that covers: the description of the system and its operation modes, its normal configuration when the reactor is at power, its configuration(s) following reactor trip, and its configuration for non-power states. A simplified system diagram is presented that includes all the components modelled (adequately labelled, and without omission) and that clearly indicates the system boundaries and interfaces with other systems. The references to all design information / characteristics, including environmental qualification of all system components are listed and up-to-date. The system boundaries are clearly identified and there are no gaps and / or overlaps at the interface with other systems modelled in the PSA. System success criteria are stated. The success criteria applied in the PSA model (e.g. the applied front- line system success criteria) are consistent with those obtained in the task on determination of success criteria. The success criteria for support systems are consistent with the outcome from the task analysis of front line systems. The information on dependencies for each component is transparent (including the support systems / actuation signal interface points). Any dependency on room / cabinet cooling is considered when necessary for normal and post trip conditions for all initiators. No dependencies are missing. The resulting success criteria for the system’s support systems based on the above is stated. Information on system tests is provided (including, for each system test, relevant aspects such as test frequency, components and failure modes tested, system realignments and component unavailabilities due to test). Information on system maintenance for all components is provided (including the mechanical and electrical tag out boundaries, i.e. an identification of all the mechanical, electrical, instrumentation, etc, components which are functionally unavailable or isolated in order to perform the maintenance). Fault tree modelling assumptions specific to the system (including all those assumptions made to simplify the model) are described, justified and reasonable. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 36 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Appropriate explanations are included to facilitate understanding of the fault tree logic. This should also include descriptions of the way in which specific circular logics have been removed. All dependencies are captured in the fault tree and have been modelled correctly. All relevant component failures have been correctly included in the fault tree. The events that represent unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance have been modelled correctly. All configurations allowed by the NPP procedures are represented in the models. The chosen modelling “solution” to avoid combinations of maintenance activities forbidden by rules and procedures has been implemented properly. Hardware failures that contribute to the Human Failure Events (e.g. failure of the alarms or indications) have been included in the model. Justification has been provided for any cases where these hardware failures have not been included based on the assumption that the HFE dominates. All relevant human failure events have been correctly included in the fault tree All house events used to deal with asymmetry in the system alignment or to enable the single fault tree model to be used for the various possible system configurations are listed and described. The purpose of each house event is clear. A table is included that lists the house events modelled in the system fault trees and their settings in each heading, sequence or event tree. The settings are correct. The use of lumped, module events or super-components has been avoided or minimised to the extent possible. If lumped, module events or super-components (beyond the pre- established component boundaries) are used in the fault trees, the contents included within the boundary of the event are clearly identified (in terms of components, failure modes and interrelations). If lumped, module events or super-components are used in the fault trees, information on dependencies (outside the event boundary) is transparent. These dependencies are properly captured in the fault tree models. No dependencies are missing. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 37 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Table A1-2.5 Human Reliability Analysis (HRA) All intra-system and inter-system CCFs to be modelled in the system fault tree have been identified in conformance with the general approach to the analysis of CCFs. All hardware recoveries modelled are described and justified. All the system fault trees (top gates) are listed together with their description. All the gates which are transfers to other system models (e.g. support system top gates) are listed together with their description. All the modelled events are listed together with their descriptions. This list is traceable to the fault trees and the system simplified diagram and description. The fault tree logic is correct. No events are missing. The fault trees provide an adequate representation of the system failures for the facility under evaluation. Note: The expectations in this table are consistent with the guidance provided in the TAG on Human Reliability Analysis NS-TAST-GD-063 The methodology/ies selected for the HRA, and in particular for the evaluation of human error probabilities (HEP), including the choice of human reliability data sources, is / are justified. The types of human failure events, HFEs, (i.e. those basic events in the fault trees and event trees which represent the human-induced failures of functions, systems or components) that are included in the logic model structure are identified up-front. Important types of HFEs have not been omitted. Pre-initiating event HFEs include individual and common-cause misalignments and mis-calibrations. The identification of these events is complete. If some potential pre-initiating event HFEs are not included in the model, adequate justification is provided. The modelling of pre-initiating event HFEs events is correct. If HFEs associated with initiating events are embedded in the data used in the analysis of initiating event frequencies for the Full Power PSA, justification is provided that these human actions have been adequately captured. Explicit analysis of HFEs associated with the initiating event is generally performed for the PSA for Low Power and Shutdown modes (see Table A1- 2.8 below). Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 38 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Post-initiating event HFEs include failures to carry out required actions in response to procedures, alarms and other cues and un- required human actions in response to situations that have been diagnosed incorrectly. The identification of these events is complete. If cases exist where the HFE related to the detection / decision part of the human action has been modelled separately from the HFE/s related to the manual actuation part of the human action, the rationale for this is clear. If some potential post-initiating event HFEs are not included in the model, adequate justification is provided. The modelling of post-initiating event HFEs events is correct. For each pre-initiating event HFE, all the operational activities which could lead to the human error are identified (e.g. surveillance tests, calibrations, maintenance activities or operational realignments). For each pre-initiating event HFE, all the alarms, indications, surveillances or tests credited to contribute to the recovery of the mis- alignment / mis-calibration are identified. The ability to recover the HFE is clear in each case. For each pre-initiating event HFE which involves failure to respond to procedural steps, equipment failures, alarms or other cues, the cues are identified. Occasions for misdiagnosis of the situation by the operators have been analysed systematically. HFEs resulting from identified credible mis-diagnosis have been modelled correctly (e.g. human actuations due to mis-diagnosis that change the course of an accident sequence will normally be modelled in the event trees. Un-required switching off of systems due to mis- diagnosis will normally be modelled in the fault trees). The human reliability quantification method/s selected is / are suitable for the specific type of HFEs addressed with the method. Specific human error contributors to each HFE are identified:  The task analysis is complete: sub-tasks included as possible contributors to the HFE and the ones which are not included are identified. The rationale for the exclusion of sub-tasks is clear. Facility-specific and HFE-specific influences of the factors required by the quantification model (Performance Shaping Factors, PSFs) are identified. Facility-specific information obtained from observations made during Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 39 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? walk-downs and simulator exercises, review of procedures, discussions with, and interviews and questionnaires to personnel, etc, is used to characterise the PSFs for each HFE. The sources of information are identified and auditable. The way in which this information is used is transparent. Time windows are correctly assigned; justification is given for the choice of events that mark the start and end of the time windows (cues and limiting times), dead times and time spent on other tasks are accounted for and adjustments made as appropriate. Specific expectations for the assessment of the HRA in Low Power and Shutdown PSA are included in Table A1- 2.8 below. Specific expectations for the assessment of the HRA for the Hazards PSA are included in Table A1- 2.7 below. The quantification of all the HFEs is transparent. The quantification of all the HFEs has been done correctly and in accordance with the HRA method/s selected. If the probabilities for some HFEs in the models have not been calculated using detailed HRA analyses (as above), an adequate justification for the generic (screening) values used is provided. Dependencies between HFEs appearing in the same accident sequence are identified and accounted for. The process by which the candidates for dependency were identified is transparent. Any assumptions made in the dependency analysis are described and justified. The determination of the degree of dependency is transparent and justified. The method by which the conditional probabilities of dependent HFEs are calculated is clear. The dependency analysis is adequate. A list of all the HFEs included in the PSA, and their associated mean probabilities and uncertainty ranges is included. This list is traceable to all the supporting analysis. Table A1-2.6 Data Analysis Table A1-2.6.1 Initiating Event Frequencies The initiating event definitions used in the data analysis task are fully consistent with those used in the list of initiating events. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 40 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The criteria for selection of analysis methods are stated. The approaches used to quantify initiating event frequencies are suitable for each type of initiating event addressed. The approach/es used to quantify frequencies of consequential initiating events is / are correct. The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. Facility-specific event data has been used to the extent possible. For cases where facility-specific event data is used, the source of event records is available, comprehensive and auditable. Facility-specific records have been interpreted correctly. For cases where operational experience from NPPs of similar design is used, its applicability is justified and the data used is auditable. In all cases where either NPP-specific data or data from NPPs of similar design has been used, information on the operating history of the facility/ies where the event/s occurred has been used in the determination of the denominators for the evaluation of initiating event frequencies. This information is auditable. For cases where generic reactor type initiating event frequencies are used, this is justified and documented in an auditable fashion. For cases where several sources of data are combined, the method of combination is mathematically correct and has identified and taken into consideration possible overlaps between the various data sources. For cases where logical models are used to calculate the initiating event frequencies, these include all the foreseen inputs leading to the initiating event. The fault trees, human reliability analyses or other models used to calculate initiating event frequencies are documented. In order to review these, inspectors can use the relevant tables of this Appendix. The initiating event groups are assigned frequencies equal to the summed frequency of all the events in the group. A list of all the initiating events, together with their frequencies, is included. Each initiating event frequency is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. A list of all the initiating event groups, together with their frequencies, is included. Each initiating event group frequency is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 41 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION is traceable to the supporting analyses. MET? Table A1-2.6.2 Random Component Failure Probabilities The component populations together with their characteristics (e.g those that define each population and make it a coherent set) are clearly identified. The component populations defined are adequate. The component boundaries (for each component population) used in the data analysis task are shown to be exactly the same as those used in the fault tree models. The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. For each component population that has been assigned failure rates from a generic data source (or a source other than the facility itself), justification is provided that the source is appropriate. Evidence is included that the component boundaries (for the particular component population) in the PSA and in the generic source of data are consistent. For cases where several sources of generic data are combined: the method of combination is transparent; it has identified, and correctly taken into consideration, possible overlaps between different sources of generic data; and it is mathematically correct. Facility-specific data has been used to the extent possible. Where facility-specific data has been used either in isolation or combined with generic data to calculate failure rates for component populations, (including the use of multiple subcomponent data within the fault tree component boundary) the event records, engineering data, and operating history data (e.g., records of operating / stand-by hours, of test / maintenance / repair time history) which have been used are available and traceable. The collection of facility records is comprehensive and exhaustive. Evidence is provided that the PSA data analysts have checked the quality and reliability of the facility-specific records used to support the PSA. Facility-specific records have been interpreted correctly (in particular to identify the failure modes modelled in the fault tree) The interpretation of historical records to reconstruct demand counts, operational times, etc. is clear. The method used for estimating failure rate parameters from raw data is transparent and mathematically correct. No calculation errors are identified. The method used for estimating failure rate parameters from Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 42 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? combinations of generic and facility-specific data (or of pre-existing and new facility-specific data) is transparent, mathematically correct and state-of-the-art. No calculation errors are identified. For component types where manufacturer’s data or expert-judgement has been used, a robust justification is provided that neither facility- specific, nor generic data are available. In instances where expert judgement has been used to estimate component failure rates, the process is transparent and robust and the outcome of the process is reasonable. Error factors are assigned commensurate with the uncertainty in the process. Instances where manufacturer’s data has been used are clearly stated and the resulting failure rates are reasonable. Error factors are assigned commensurate with the uncertainty in the data used. Facility-specific information on test intervals is used to calculate probabilities for the failure modes of the components on standby. The tests selected are suitable for the failure modes of concern. This information is consistent with the information on system testing recorded in the documentation of the system analysis. The mission times (used to calculate the probabilities of failure to operate of components) are correct and consistent with the information on mission times recorded in the documentation of the Success Criteria Determination task. The methodology used for the calculation of structural failure probabilities is justified. The details of the analysis are transparent. If use is made of data from structural (e.g. pipework) failure databases, the sources of data and the way in which this data has been used are clear. The applicability of the data is justified. If use is made of a probabilistic fracture mechanics code, the code is state of the art. Evidence is provided that the code has been validated against operational experience and / or experiments. Evidence is provided that the code users are sufficiently qualified and experienced to be aware of the code’s capabilities and limitations. The range of loads and combinations of loads that could lead to the structural failures of concern should be adequate to represent the conditions which are possible for the NPP under evaluation. Inspectors should refer to TAGs NS-TAST-GD-016 and NS-TAST- GD-016017 for further guidance here. Assumptions on the reliability of passive systems / features are substantiated by appropriate and sufficient analysis covering the full range of fault and accident conditions for which they are required and by appropriate tests. The supporting evidence is available. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 43 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The methodology used for the estimation of failure probabilities for computer-based systems is transparent and meets industry-accepted practices. The analysis of the software reliability carried out by the dutyholder has identified the influencing factors that affect the quality of the software. The results of these analyses have been taken into account in the reliability calculation in a transparent manner. If the software system has been separated into parts that are treated individually in the reliability analysis, the dependencies between the various parts are addressed explicitly. The reliability analysis of the computer-based hardware is documented. Any self-checking built into the systems is taken into account in an adequate manner. The dependencies between diverse software systems are dealt with explicitly. Inspectors should refer to NS-TAST-GD-046 for further guidance on computer-based systems. A list of all the basic events that represent random component failures together with their parameter estimates is included. Each parameter estimate is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. The descriptions of events that represent unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance (planned and unplanned) in the data analysis task are fully consistent with the unavailability events modelled in the system fault trees. The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. For cases where generic data has been used, a justification is provided. Assumptions regarding unavailability time are stated and are reasonable. Use of facility-specific data is traceable to existing records. Justification is provided that the time span of the facility-specific data used in the PSA is sufficient to obtain realistic estimates of the unavailabilities. The probabilities assigned to events that represent configurations not observed during the data collection period are reasonable best Table A1-2.6.3 Unavailabilities Due to Testing and Maintenance Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 44 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation estimates. ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The calculation of unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance (planned and unplanned) is correct and applicable for the operational state of the facility to which they are applied. A list of all the basic events that represent unavailabilities due to testing and maintenance (planned and unplanned) together with their parameter estimates is included. Each parameter estimate is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. Table A1-2.6.4 Common Cause Failures (CCFs) The approach selected for the CCF basic event modelling and analysis is justified. The method chosen for CCF parameter estimation is transparent and meets good international practice. The approach selected for the CCF modelling and analysis is detailed enough to adequately represent all levels of redundancy provided for in the specific facility design and to obtain appropriate CCF parameter estimates for such levels of redundancy. The approach selected for modelling CCFs addresses both intra- system and inter-system CCF events. The CCF event names and definitions are the same as those used in the fault tree models. The criteria for selection / precedence of data sources are stated. The applicability of the CCF data sources used is justified. If a screening approach has been adopted to narrow down the number of detailed analysis to be performed, the screening criteria used is stated. The screening values for the CCF model parameters are justified. If generic CCF parameters are used, the reasons why these values are considered appropriate are clear. Evidence is provided that the component boundaries, failure modes and failure root causes are consistent with those assumed in the generic data sources. If CCF evaluation has been performed using a pseudo-facility-specific database for which industry-wide data has been reinterpreted for the specific conditions of the NPP under evaluation, the analysis of NPP- specific defences against CCFs relative to those expected for the facility from which the data were originally taken is traceable and Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 45 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation appropriate. ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Table A1-2.7 Analysis of Hazards Table A1-2.7.1 General If CCF raw data or information available internationally is used (e.g. data from the International Common Cause Failure Data Exchange, ICDE, project), its applicability is justified and the way in which the data or information is used is transparent. For cases where expert-judgement has been used for CCF parameter estimation, a justification is provided that no better source of data is available. The expert judgement process is transparent and robust and the outcome of the process is reasonable. Error factors are assigned commensurate to the uncertainty in the process. The quantification of all the CCF events is transparent and has been done in accordance with the CCF method/s selected. No errors are apparent. A list of all the CCF events, together with their parameter estimates is included. Each CCF parameter estimate is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. The analysis of hazards starts from a complete list of internal and external (natural and man-made) hazards. The approach and criteria for the screening of hazards are auditable and justified. The reasons why the hazards selected for further analysis are applicable to the NPP under evaluation are included. The reasons why the hazards excluded from the analysis are not applicable to the NPP under evaluation are clear and justified. The frequencies and magnitude of all hazards selected for analysis are identified. The hazard impact analysis (as a function of the magnitude of the hazard if appropriate) is auditable and covers possible initiating events, damage to equipment and structures, and impact on human performance. The hazard impact analysis has been undertaken using an adequate method and is auditable. The hazard analyses reflect facility-specific and site-specific features Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 46 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation appropriately. ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Specific modifications made to the internal events PSA models (event trees and fault trees) and parameters (e.g. HEPs), or any new models and parameters developed to analyse the risk associated with the hazard under evaluation are auditable. Tables A1-2.7.2, A1-2.7.3 and A1-2.7.4 provide specific expectations when assessing PSA for internal fires, internal flooding and seismic events. This guidance may also be applied by inspectors assessing PSA for other types of internal or external hazard, provided care is taken to ensure its applicability. Table A1-2.7.2 Analysis of Internal Fires The method selected for the analysis of internal fires is justified. The approach chosen is sufficiently detailed to allow a realistic estimation of the fire risk and the identification of specific strengths and vulnerabilities. Evidence that walk-downs have been conducted is included and documented in detail (since fire risk analyses can only be realistic when supported by local walk-downs). The link between the information compiled during the walk-downs and the various aspects of the Fire PSA is apparent throughout. General assumptions of the fire analysis are stated and properly justified. If screening processes are undertaken during the various steps of the Fire PSA to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be performed, the qualitative and quantitative criteria applied for screening fire compartments are stated. The qualitative and quantitative screening criteria are adequate to ensure that the risk from individually screened-out scenarios and their cumulative contribution to the risk (in terms of contributions to the frequencies of core damage and significant releases) are acceptably low. Assumptions made in support of the initial quantification of fire compartments for the purpose of quantitative screening are transparent (e.g. assumptions on the impact of fires on equipment, human reliability, etc) and adequate. The global boundary of the analysis is defined so that this includes all locations at the NPP relevant to the risk calculations (e.g. all areas of the facility associated with normal and emergency reactor operating plant and support systems, with power production, areas associated with a sister unit containing shared equipment etc). Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 47 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The Fire PSA is based upon a subdivision of the NPP into well- defined compartments with non-combustible barriers (i.e. which substantially confine the heat and products of combustion associated with a fire). In cases where the barriers are not fire-rated, these are identified and addressed in the inter-compartment analysis. Details of the compartmentalisation of the facility are transparent and include a description of the partitioning elements or features which have been assumed. A list of all compartments is included using a consistent identification scheme. Up-to-date drawings or references showing compartment boundaries are available. The process to identify essential equipment has identified all equipment whose failure or mal-operation will cause an initiating event or will adversely impact credited functions or operator actions. The location of this equipment, together with its normal, desired and failed positions on loss of services are identified. Established procedures are in place and implemented for evaluating circuits and selecting cables required to support the operation of essential equipment. Equipment circuits and cables required to support the credited functionality of essential equipment are identified. All potentially impacting power supplies are identified. This may include power supplies not evaluated in the internal events PSA. For example, the power supply to a normally closed valve which is required to remain in position and which would remain closed on loss of power would have been excluded from the fault trees for internal events. However, these power supplies need to be identified for the analysis of internal fires, since a fire may lead to spurious energisation and opening of the valve. Cable routing information (including associated equipment, cable IDs, raceways, locations etc) is stored in a database. This information should be readily retrievable and kept up-to-date. If a first qualitative screening of fire compartments is undertaken, the details of this are transparent. The screening has been performed in accordance with established criteria. A list of all compartments screened-in is included. This list includes all compartments that could make a potential contribution to the risk from fire. Descriptions of all fire compartments qualitatively screened-in are available. The descriptions include information on equipment Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 48 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? allocation, potential fire sources and targets, fire load, passive protection, detection and suppression equipment, fire spreading paths (e.g. failed barriers or ventilation ducts and fire dampers) and other information necessary for the analysis, such as the control programmes for combustible and ignition sources for the specific compartment. Evaluation of fire frequencies has been performed for all the compartments qualitatively screened-in. The method for the calculation of fire frequencies, including the input data and information used, is clear. Generic and NPP-specific fire history information is used to establish fire frequencies associated with individual fire source types. The use of data from generic sources and facility-specific sources is justified and transparent. If fire severity is used as a criterion to screen generic and NPP- specific events from frequency evaluations, then this should be transparent and justified. NPP-specific fire characteristics (such as the type and number of fire ignition sources and evaluation of transient combustibles) are used to apportion the expected influence on the likelihood of ignition in specific fire compartments in a transparent and adequate manner. Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific information are only made for NPPs not yet built and when used, are identified explicitly. Fire suppression is not taken into account in the calculation of fire frequencies. The calculation of fire frequencies for all fire compartments is documented explicitly. No errors are apparent. A list of all the compartments together with their fire frequencies is included. Each fire frequency is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. If a quantitative screening of fire compartments is undertaken, the details of this are transparent. The screening has been performed in accordance with established criteria. A list of all compartments with an indication of whether they have been quantitatively screened-out (and the reason why), or screened- in (retained for detailed compartment analysis) is included. Detailed analysis has been performed for all the compartments quantitatively screened-in. The fire scenario (or scenarios) associated with each compartment is properly characterised in terms of source, propagation, detection, Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 49 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION human response and damage: MET?  For each compartment, details of the specific fire sources and targets are transparent. Evidence that all potential ignition sources have been addressed is provided.  The analysis of is transparent. Evidence is provided that the fire model used to analyse fire growth has been validated and verified. fire growth within each compartment  The analysis of fire impact in each fire compartment is transparent and takes into account:  Equipment damaged in the compartment by flame, plume, ceiling jet, hot gases and radiant heat.  Electrical faults (open circuits, shorts to ground, short circuits and hot shorts) and their impact, e.g., loss of equipment function, spurious actuation of equipment (e.g., undesired reconfiguration of valves or actuation of standby systems), loss and / or false signals and indications.  Explosions and their impact, including high-energy arcing faults.  Collapse of structures and their impact.  Missiles and their impact.  Smoke and heat effects and their propagation to neighbouring compartments.  Identification of initiating events in each compartment as the result of the fire.  For each compartment, a fire progression tree (or equivalent) has been developed that shows the fire source, defined fire growing stages, success / failure of fire suppression before reaching a given damage stage or triggering of an initiating event. The end points of these analyses are one or more fire damage states for each compartment with associated frequencies. These are taken forward for quantification.  The reliability of the various fire protection measures (both in is terms of equipment as well as human performance) substantiated. For compartments where more than one fire scenario has been identified, clear and unambiguous identification of the various fire scenarios in the compartment is included. Individual analyses for the separate fire scenarios in the compartment is provided (the above bullets also apply to individual scenarios). In cases where compartments have been further divided into sub- compartments for the detailed analysis, the rationale for this is transparent and details of this are documented explicitly. The design features and the automatic and manual actions that prevent fire Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 50 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? propagation between sub-compartments are identified explicitly. Adequate justification of the effectiveness of these measures is provided. Individual analyses for the separate sub-compartments is provided (the above bullets also apply to individual sub- compartments). The analysis of inter-compartment fire propagation is documented explicitly. The requirements listed above for fire modelling of single compartments are applied to the modelling of multi-compartment scenarios. Evidence is provided that passive fire barriers credited for preventing inter-compartment propagation (in the absence of suppression activities) are adequately rated and properly installed and maintained. The effectiveness and reliability of any active fire barrier (e.g. damper, suppression system) is explicitly addressed in the fire risk model and the risk contribution associated with its failure is evaluated. Details of the fire barrier and propagation analysis (barrier penetration analysis) are transparent. Scenarios involving two or more compartments are identified and characterised explicitly. Screening criteria applied to multi- compartment analysis are consistent with the single compartment qualitative criteria. Multi-compartment scenarios which cannot be screened-out are carried onto the next stages of the Fire PSA. Details of the accident sequence modelling and quantification for each identified scenario are transparent. In particular:  The most onerous initiating event has been selected to be the basis for the quantification of each fire scenario. The rationale for this selection is clear.  The internal events PSA model has been suitably modified so as to be capable of representing fire-induced equipment failures and mal-operations or degraded human errors in combination with non-fire-related, random failures. For example potential failures or combinations of failures may have been neglected on the grounds of low probability in the internal events analysis, which may be significant in the event of a fire.  Details of the human reliability analysis in fire scenarios are auditable. The impact of specific actions that operators may take in accordance with post fire procedures, or erroneously due to spurious indications following a fire, which may degrade credited PSA functions, have been modelled appropriately. The impact of fire on human performance, for example in terms of potential enhanced stress, accessibility in scenarios of CCR abandonment), etc, is analysed fully and local actuations (e.g. for Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 51 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? transparently. The HRA for fire scenarios is adequate.  The quantitative and qualitative results of the quantification of each fire scenario are included.  The results of the Fire PSA also include an estimate of the core damage and significant release frequency arising from the set of compartments screened-out from the analysis. Table A1-2.7.3 Analysis of Internal Flooding The approach to Flooding PSA adopted is sufficiently detailed to allow a realistic estimation of the risk from flooding and the identification of specific strengths and vulnerabilities. Evidence that walk-downs have been conducted is included and documented in detail (since flooding risk analyses can only be realistic when supported by local walk-downs). The link between the information compiled during the walk-downs and the various aspects of the Flooding PSA is apparent throughout. General assumptions of the flooding analysis are explicitly stated and properly justified. If screening processes are undertaken during the various steps of the Flooding PSA to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be performed, the qualitative and quantitative criteria applied for screening flood compartments are stated. The qualitative and quantitative screening criteria are adequate to ensure that the risk from individually screened-out scenarios and their cumulative contribution to the risk (in terms of contributions to the frequencies of core damage and significant releases) are acceptably low. Assumptions made in support of the initial quantification of flood compartments for the purpose of quantitative screening are transparent (e.g., assumptions on the impact of floods on equipment, human reliability, etc) and adequate. The global boundary of the analysis is defined so that this includes all locations at the NPP relevant to the risk calculations (e.g. all areas of the facility associated with normal and emergency reactor operating plant and support systems, with power production, areas associated with a sister unit containing shared equipment etc.). The Flooding PSA is based upon the subdivision of the NPP into well- defined compartments (physically separate areas where flood is generally viewed as independent of other areas in terms of impact). Details of the compartmentalization of the facility are available including physical barriers (walls, floors, bunds etc), mitigating features (sumps, drains) adjacent compartments and propagation Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 52 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION paths (open hatches, etc). MET? A list of all compartments showing compartment boundaries is included. Up-to-date drawings or references to these are included. Descriptions of the content of all flood compartments are available. The descriptions include information on all equipment susceptible to flood located in each of compartment, the minimum water volume needed to affect water-sensitive equipment by immersion / splashing, internal flood barriers and spray shields, potential flood sources and types (e.g. high energy steam pipework), automatic and manual flood detection and isolation means, possible flood effects in each compartment (e.g. initiating events, damage to safety equipment) and in compartments to which the flooding may propagate, etc. The susceptibility of each type of component appearing in the PSA to flood-induced failure mechanisms is identified and justified (e.g. submergence, jet impingement, pipe whip, humidity, condensation, temperature) For each flood source, the propagation path from the source compartment to the point of accumulation is identified, including the potential for structural failures of walls, doors, back flow device failures, HVAC ducts, etc. Details of the first qualitative screening of flood compartments and flood sources are auditable. The screening has been performed in accordance with established criteria. A list of all compartments screened-in is included. This includes all compartments that could make a potential contribution to the risk from internal flooding. Evaluation of flooding frequencies has been performed for all the compartments qualitatively screened-in. Generic and NPP-specific flood history information is used to establish flood frequencies and severities associated with individual flood source types. The use of data from generic sources and NPP- specific sources is justified and transparent. The method for the calculation of flood frequencies, including the input data and information used, is clear. For each compartment, the nature of possible flood causes is identified, e.g. maintenance activities, pipe breaks, expansion joint breaks, etc. Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific information are only made for NPPs not yet built and when used are identified explicitly. For each compartment, the location and characterisation of flood sources, describing e.g. the system that is the source of the flooding, Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 53 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? source location, flow rate maximal flood volume and flood frequency, are transparent. Assumptions made in lieu of facility-specific information are only made for NPPs not yet built and when used are identified explicitly. Similar flood cases are adequately grouped in the modelled scenarios. All the assumptions made in this process are transparent. The calculation of flood frequencies for all identified flooding scenarios is documented explicitly. No errors are apparent. A list of all the identified flooding scenarios, together with their frequencies, is included. Each frequency is represented by a mean value and a statistical representation of its uncertainty. This list is traceable to the supporting analyses. Details of the quantitative screening of flood scenarios are transparent. The screening has been performed in accordance with established criteria. A list of all flood scenarios with indication of whether they have been quantitatively screened out (and the reason why), or screened in (retained for detailed analysis) is included.  Detailed analysis has been performed for all the flood scenarios quantitatively screened-in, including:  For each compartment where a flooding scenario has been identified, the rate at which a flood could develop is provided.  The equipment which is assumed to be damaged by water spray, jet impingement, pipe whip etc. due to the flood source is identified.  Flood effects to e.g. equipment immersion, humidity and temperature are identified. These cover both initiating events and equipment damage. the compartment due in  Adverse effects in compartments affected by the propagation of floods are identified.  For each flooding scenario, a tree (or equivalent) has been developed that identifies flood progression stages reached (leading to an initiating event or to damage to any relevant system) depending on the success or failure of flood isolation actions. flood progression  Indications, events and any other cues which can provide flood symptoms and allow for flood detection are identified explicitly.  Actions needed for flood isolation before a given flood progression stage is reached are described explicitly.  The reliability of the flooding protection measures (both in terms of equipment as well as human performance) are substantiated. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 54 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation  MET? ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION Details of the accident sequence modelling and quantification for each identified scenario are transparent. In particular:  The initiating event identified for each flood scenario is justified.  The modifications made to the internal event PSA event trees and fault trees (and any new models developed) to calculate the probability of core damage and significant release at various evaluated progression stages, taking into account the impact of the flood on safety systems and operating crew actions are transparent. The resulting models are correct.  Details of the human reliability analysis for flooding scenarios are transparent. The flood-related factors that may influence human performance are identified explicitly. The analysis is complete and transparent. The HRA for flooding scenarios is adequate.  The quantitative and qualitative results of the quantification of each flooding scenario are included.  The results of the Flooding PSA also include an estimate of the core damage frequency and significant release frequency arising from the set of flooding compartments / scenarios screened-out from the analysis. Table A1-2.7.4 Seismic Analysis The approach used to evaluate and represent the hazard from earthquakes is described and appropriate The seismic hazard analysis is documented in detail. The assumptions and models used for aspects such as the characterisation of sources and attenuation relationships are clearly identified. All the values for the parameters used in the model are identified and the way the final hazard curves have been constructed is auditable. The mean curve for the site is represented together with its uncertainty bounds. This is traceable to the underlying analyses. All the references to historical data used are identified and auditable. The approach used to evaluate the impact of earthquakes on the NPP structures and components is described and appropriate. All the equipment that requires analysis of the probability of failure against earthquake magnitudes is identified, i.e. all equipment required to trip, shutdown, cool and monitor the reactor, all structures whose failure could hamper core cooling, and all equipment and structures required to mitigate severe accidents or whose failure could impact releases (Level 2 PSA), etc. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 55 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? This list is traceable to safety case / internal events PSA sources. If the number of components for which detailed fragility analysis has been performed has been limited using some type of screening, the screening criteria is defined and is adequate. The screening analysis is traceable. The design parameters used for the derivation of fragilities of equipment and structures are identified. The method used to evaluate seismic fragilities is described. If different methods have been to evaluate the fragilities for different components or structures, the methods lead to consistent results. The fragility analysis is auditable. The results of the screening analysis of relay and contactor chatter for the safety systems are included with a list of relays and associated fragilities included in the final model. The initiating events arising from the full range of earthquakes are identified. If the number of earthquake-induced initiating events considered in the Seismic PSA quantification has been limited using some type of screening, the screening criteria is defined and is adequate. The screening analysis is traceable. The potential for secondary hazards, e.g. earthquake-induced fires and floods has been analysed systematically during the seismic walk- down and the results are auditable. The way in which the seismic failures and successes and random component failures have been combined is traceable. If seismic damage states have been developed, each of them correctly represents the frequency of the associated seismic failures by the mathematically correct inclusion of the combination of failure and success paths. Any modifications to the event and fault tree logic models to incorporate the impact of earthquakes on the NPP are auditable and correct. The potential for the correlation of seismically-induced component or structural failures has been addressed and any assumptions made regarding the correlation are identified and justified. The Human Reliability Analysis has been revisited to address the operator response following the seismic events of concern. Details of this analysis are auditable. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 56 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The quantitative and qualitative results of the quantification are included. Sensitivity, uncertainty and importance analyses are provided. Table A1-2.8 Low Power and Shutdown Modes Note: The expectations listed in the tables A1-2.1 to A1-2.7 above are also applicable to the Low Power and Shutdown parts of the PSA. Table A1- 2.8 therefore only deals with additional expectations applicable specifically to this part of the analysis. The identification of the Plant Operational States (POS) during non- full power modes is justified. There are no gaps and / or overlaps between the POS addressed in the Low power and Shutdown PSA and those covered in the PSA for full power. All the characteristics considered for the identification of possible stages during low power and shutdown (pre-POS) are clear. No important characteristic is missing. The grouping of pre-POS into the final list of POS is justified and visible. The grouping is adequately justified. A table listing all the POS with their characteristics is included. The information about all the POS’ characteristics is presented and complete. Information about plant configuration (decay heat removal method, cooling circuit configuration, etc) in each POS, frontline system availability in each POS, length of time in each POS, assumed decay heat levels is presented. The definition and characterisation of each POS is traceable to facility-specific information. The analysis of initiating events for each POS is transparent. The analysis of initiating events has considered events based on plant failures, those triggered by operator interactions and those caused by internal and external hazards. The details of the analysis are transparent. A systematic examination of NPP procedures for changing configurations, equipment testing and maintenance procedures has been carried out to identify potential human errors during the execution of such normal procedures that are, or may lead, to initiating events. The analysis process is transparent. A table showing the initiating event groups defined and their applicability to each POS is presented. No errors are apparent Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 57 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The derivation of the frequency of the initiating events is specific for each POS (i.e. it has taken into consideration the specific characteristics of each POS). The analysis is transparent. The models used to calculate IE frequencies are presented. The frequency of each initiating event is calculated on a per calendar year basis (so that the risks associated with each POS can be compared). Otherwise the units used are explained. If screening of combinations of initiating event groups / POS is undertaken to reduce the amount of detailed analysis to be performed, the screening approach, criteria and process are clear and acceptable. The screening process does not lead to the removal of events that may be significant for the intended applications of the PSA. The thermal-hydraulic, neutronics (or any other) analyses performed to support the determination of success criteria for the Low Power and Shutdown PSA are presented. The thermal-hydraulic analyses performed to support the determination of success criteria for the Low Power and Shutdown PSA have taken into consideration the specific characteristics of these operating modes, e.g. reactor coolant system water inventory, steam generator availability, core inventory, decay heat curve. The boundary conditions used in these analyses are stated. The success criteria for the Low Power and Shutdown PSA are developed on a realistic basis. Event trees have been developed for each combination initiating event-POS that has been screened-in. System models have been developed taking into consideration the specific characteristics of each POS. Details of this are transparent. References to all maintenance procedures and work plans which are used to define the event tree boundary conditions and system status modelled in the fault trees are explicitly stated. The HRA method selected can adequately represent the aspects of the NPP shutdown relevant to human reliability which may be different to when the reactor is operating at power, e.g. long time windows for operator actuation, status of procedural guidance and training, familiarity with shutdown accident transients, levels of supervision, availability of indications / status of the control room, difficulties in diagnosing events, increased workload, etc. The HRA has considered all the aspects of the NPP shutdown relevant to human reliability mentioned above clearly and systematically. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 58 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation  ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Specific aspects of the low power and shutdown modes that may affect the risk due to hazards (which may differ from when the reactor is operating at power) have been clearly and systematically addressed. Examples of specific aspects that inspectors should expect the PSA to address are:   Internal fires: amount of hot work; additional inventories of combustible materials introduced into some areas; status of automatic fire suppression systems, fire barriers, fire doors and penetration seals, etc. Internal flooding: temporary water systems and hose connections; different plant configurations and possibilities of valve misalignments leading to flooding; status of drainage systems, doors in segregation barriers and penetration seals, increased possibility of maintenance errors leading to floods, etc.  Dropped loads: number of heavy loads lifted during maintenance outages; potential for dropped loads to directly affect spent fuel during the refuelling, etc. Table A1-2.9 Uncertainty analyses, Quantification and Interpretation of the Level 1 PSA Results Table A1-2.9.1 Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analyses The sources of uncertainty in the Level 1 PSA are identified explicitly. Suitable methods are chosen to address the various types of uncertainty, to evaluate their impact on the results of the PSA and to interpret their significance. Sensitivity studies have been carried out to evaluate the risk significance of assumptions. The sensitivity studies address the effects of key assumptions and combinations of assumptions. The sensitivity studies and their results are transparent. Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been estimated. Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been propagated through the models to generate uncertainty distributions for the results of the Level 1 PSA. The means resulting from the uncertainty propagation are the values that have been compared against the relevant numerical criteria (rather than using the point estimate means which result from a simple arithmetic evaluation of the PSA cutsets). Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 59 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Based on the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations, an understanding has been gained of which parametric and modelling uncertainties most contribute to the overall uncertainty of the results of the Level 1 PSA. This analysis is transparent. The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations demonstrate that the overall conclusions obtained from the Level 1 PSA are still valid. Steps have been taken to reduce the most important uncertainties (and hence the uncertainties in the overall PSA results). These are explicitly described. Table A1-2.9.2 Quantification of the Level 1 PSA  The results obtained from the quantification are reproducible:  The type of quantification and related approximations are explicitly stated. adequate.  The cut-offs used for the quantification are explicitly stated and  Any minimal cutset editing performed is transparent.  A description of the way in which circular logic has been removed between front line / support and support / support system fault trees if done within the quantification process is provided.  Complete results of the quantification are provided. These include:  Minimal cutsets with numerical results and description of the basic events.  Lists of basic events and associated importance measures, as a minimum fractional contributions (Fussell Vesely Importance) and risk increase factors (Risk Achievement Worth).  Lists of relevant groups of components or basic events and associated importance functions as for basic events.  Quantification has been carried out (and results provided) at different levels:  Level 1 PSA (for full power operation).  Level 1 PSA (for operation at low power and shutdown). Individual initiating event groups (event trees). Individual accident sequences (in the event trees). Individual hazards for power operation and non-power conditions. Individual hazard scenarios for power operation and non-power conditions.  Total annual contribution from all NPP operations (power and non-     Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 60 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? power) for all internal initiators and hazards and the breakdown of this for the different operational states.  The estimated level of risk associated with each operational state in order to support the ALARP arguments. A survey of the PSA results has been carried out by the dutyholder to confirm the correctness of the Level 1 PSA quantification. Table A1-2.9.3 Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 1 PSA Results A summary of the Level 1 PSA results is included in the PSA documentation. The summary of the Level 1 PSA results together with any accompanying discussions are sufficient for PSA and non-PSA specialists to get a clear understanding of how big the risk of core damage is, where this risk comes from and which are the most significant uncertainties. All vulnerabilities identified by the PSA are transparent. The corrective actions proposed to address these vulnerabilities are described explicitly. The PSA has been used to support the optioneering analysis and details of this are auditable. An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed corrective actions is documented explicitly. This has been used as an input to assigning the level of priority of these proposals. A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective actions are captured, as appropriate, in the NPP design or design modification processes, in the NPP process for procedure development or modification, etc. A demonstration is included that the risk of core damage for the facility under evaluation is ALARP. The basis for the definition of LARGE RELEASE is presented and explained. The basis for the definition of LARGE EARLY RELEASE is presented and explained. If a design target for LARGE RELEASE FREQUENCY has been used, this is stated explicitly. If a design target for LARGE EARLY RELEASE FREQUENCY has been used, this is stated explicitly. The Level 2 PSA has been designed so that its output forms an adequate input to perform a Level 3 PSA. 3. Table A1-3. Level 2 PSA Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 61 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Table A1-3.1 Interface between Level 1 and Level 2 PSA The entirety of the Level 1 PSA has been taken forward to the Level 2 analysis (Internal initiating events, internal and external hazards for the reactor at power, low power and shutdown, and for the fuel route) The analysis of the interface between Level 1 and Level 2 PSA has addressed systematically all the attributes of the Level 1 core damage sequences that can affect the accident progression. The analysis has identified all attributes of the Level 1 core damage sequences that can affect the mode and timing of containment failure, containment bypass or affect the source term. Steps have been taken to give confidence that a complete set of attributes has been identified, including as appropriate, the investigation of attributes identified in other studies and justifications for inclusion or exclusion of features are presented. The analysis is performed in a way which, together with the Level 2 model and the mechanism for transferring information between the two parts of the analysis, ensures that all dependencies between Level 1 core damage sequences and the Level 2 model (including event logic, system-related and human error dependencies) are correctly represented. The analysis is transparent. Based on the above, a complete set of Plant Damage States (PDS) is defined, each of which represents a set of core damage sequences with a unique expected severe accident progression and set of source term characteristics. The characterisation of each PDSs is clearly presented in terms of the attributes of the Level 1 sequences it represents and the status of each of these attributes. The identification and characterisation of PDSs is adequate. A sufficient number of PDS has been defined to avoid masking important ways of accident progression while ensuring a manageable scope of analysis. Any modification made to the original Level 1 PSA event trees to address Level 2 issues (features that can affect the accident progression but were not considered originally in the Level 1 PSA models), is clear. The models are correct. Relevant systems not already covered in the Level 1 PSA are analysed to the same specification and level of detail as the other systems included in the Level 1 PSA. All the dependencies are properly captured. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 62 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Relevant human failure events not already covered in the Level 1 PSA are analysed to the same specification and level of detail as the HFEs included in the Level 1 PSA. The criteria used to group the (Level 1 - Level 2 interface) event tree sequences into the defined PDSs are identified explicitly and correct. The process of mapping the resulting accident sequences from the modified event trees to the relevant Pant Damage States is transparent. If the binning process (allocation of sequences to end state categories) is automated, an auditable record exists of this process. The identification and characterisation of PDSs is traceable in both directions, i.e. Level 1 cutset / sequence to PDS and PDS back to Level 1 sequence. No errors are identified in the grouping of accident sequences into the defined PDSs. Each PDS has been assigned a frequency equal to the summed frequency of all the sequences in the group. For the follow-up Level 2 analysis, each PDS is represented by the most onerous sequence. In general, if the PDS structure is a proper one, there should not be any significant differences in the sequences within a PDS, and therefore, the PDS representative sequence would be the one with the highest frequency. If a separate code is used for Level 2 PSA, the way in which the sequence or cutset definitions and frequencies from the Level 1 – Level 2 interface have been transferred to the Level 2 PSA is transparent. The code/s used for analysing the progression of severe accidents has / have been qualified for the design of the NPP under evaluation. For example, the computer model has been successfully used to simulate steady state operating behaviour and a variety of initiating events (such as unanticipated transients). Alternatively, the code has been applied to experimental facilities or to other NPPs of similar design with equivalent fidelity. The code and inputs meet ONR quality expectations (e.g. as described in Table A1- 1.4 of this Appendix). The input data used by the code represents the facility in sufficient detail and with sufficient fidelity to provide the output required by the Level 2 PSA model. The code/s used include deterministic models for all known severe accident phenomena that could occur with high probability and have a first-order impact on the response to the postulated fault. The analytical models contained in the computer code have been sufficiently validated (both individually and collectively; i.e. against Table A1-3.2 Deterministic Accident Progression Analysis Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 63 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? separate effects and integral experimental measurements) to provide reasonable confidence in the calculated results. The codes have been used within their limit of applicability. Modelling options (if any) selected by the code user reflect ‘best- practice’ recommendations of the code developers or a recognised and experienced user community. Deviations from best-practice choices of options are documented and justified. The modelling options available in the computer code are applied consistently throughout the calculations performed for different fault sequences. Differences in the codes, models or modelling options used (if any) are documented and justified. In cases where some of the severe accident phenomena have not been addressed directly via code calculations, the applicability of the sources of information used to address these phenomena is justified. No relevant and potentially important phenomena have been neglected or dismissed without an adequate technical justification. All the assumptions made are stated explicitly. All the assumptions made are justified, i.e. the rationale for choosing these assumptions and for rejecting alternatives is clear and reasonable. The way in which each assumption may bias the outcomes of the analysis is indicated, or the effect(s) of alternative, reasonable assumptions on the calculated results is demonstrated to be negligible. The accident progression analyses have been performed on a best- estimate basis and are specific to the facility. In the absence of facility-specific details, all the assumptions regarding facility design and construction are stated. A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured to support the future design and construction. The accident scenarios selected as input to the accident progression calculations are appropriate and transparent throughout the various accident progression analyses. The accident scenarios selected as input to the accident progression calculations are consistent with the Level 1 PDS sequences (which are the starting point for the accident scenarios evaluated) and with the Level 2 event tree sequences to which they are applied. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 64 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? Assumptions made in the accident progression analyses regarding operator actions are consistent with the operator actions in the corresponding Level 2 PSA accident progression event tree sequences. The accident progression analyses are documented and traceable. The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset of the accident progression analyses. In these cases no significant errors have been found. The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative subset of accident progression analyses. In these cases, the results obtained are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder. Table A1-3.3 Containment Performance Analysis The method used for analysing the probability of failure of the containment (i.e. the method used for analysing the containment structural response) under different stress conditions caused by the severe accidents is transparent. The method is state-of-the-art and meets accepted industry standards. The code and inputs used for analysing containment structural integrity meet ONR quality expectations as described in Table A1-1.4 of this Appendix. The input data used by the code represents the facility in sufficient detail and with sufficient fidelity to provide the quality of output required by the Level 2 PSA model. The models used to characterise the loss of containment integrity (e.g. the models used for thresholds and / or leak before break) are explicitly stated and justified. The way in which analysis of the failure of penetrations has been performed is transparent and adequate. The loads and combinations of loads studied are clear. The range of loads and combinations of loads addressed is adequate to represent the conditions of the severe accident sequences, which are possible for the facility under evaluation. Temperature effects are addressed and the assumptions made are consistent with the conditions arising in the accident sequences for which the results of the analysis are used. In the absence of facility-specific details, all the assumptions regarding containment geometry, construction and materials are transparent. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 65 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured to support the future design and construction. The material properties assumed are realistic. A systematic review of the containment structure has been performed to identify plausible and credible failure modes. Failure criteria for containment structures are clearly defined. Uncertainties associated with the capacity of the containment under extreme loads have been identified explicitly. Uncertainties have been appropriately treated and the results of the analysis are presented in a form consistent with their use in the probabilistic accident progression models. ONR expectation is that the results of the structural analysis would be presented as probabilistic fragility curves, unless it has been justified that the uncertainties are small enough for the use of a bounding point-value structural capacity to be used. Any expert judgement used to derive the containment capacity and uncertainty parameters has been documented. The expert judgement process adopted is appropriate. The containment performance analyses are thoroughly documented and fully traceable. The approach used for the delineation of the severe accident sequences (accident progression event trees, APETs, or equivalent) is transparent. That is, the chronological progression of events can be traced either via graphical diagrams or an equivalent method, and the logical end-states of individual accident sequences (e.g., pathways through an event tree) are associated with a single, unique outcome (e.g. a release category). The Level 2 PSA code used to develop the APETs provides the necessary capability to support the modelling approach selected, e.g. the capability to handle multiple branches for a single event tree node, headings represented by models other than fault trees (e.g. event trees, user defined code), global variables (e.g. to allow tracking of hydrogen generation and combustion at different points in an accident sequence), etc. If the Level 2 PSA code does not provide the necessary capability to support all aspects of the probabilistic modelling approach selected, the way in which these aspects of the model have been handled in the quantification is clear. Table A1-3.4 Probabilistic Modelling Framework – Accident Progression Event Trees (APET) Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 66 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? An APET has been developed for each PDS. The APETs are clearly described (i.e. structure and headings). The phenomena addressed are clearly identified. All relevant phenomena significantly affecting the accident progression or source term magnitudes (as far as required to comply with table A1-3.5) have been included. The selection of phenomena for inclusion has followed a systematic process which addresses generic accident phenomena and specific plant issues, and no relevant phenomena have been neglected or dismissed without an adequate technical justification. The time frames depicted are transparent and organised in the correct order with proper treatment of chronological dependencies. When uncertainties are addressed via the APET structure, the way in which this has been done is transparent. All assumptions are described and justified. All simplifications (e.g. issues excluded from the APET) are described and justified. The dependencies between / among phenomena are explicitly identified and properly captured in the logic model and in the assignment of event probabilities. Dependencies within the Level 1 core damage sequences are adequately modelled. The structure of each APET, and associated event probabilities, are traceable to the underlying deterministic accident progressions analyses carried out to support their development. The APET includes HFEs for severe accident management actions. Table A1-.2.5 of this appendix applies for the assessment of these actions. The dependencies with the HFEs in the Level 1 PSA are identified and treated appropriately. Potential adverse effects of severe accident management actions are modelled. The method used to assign probabilities to the events of the APET is described. The approach selected is valid and is used to assign probabilities consistently throughout the Level 2 PSA. In particular:  Event probabilities which represent random events (i.e. events representing aleatory or stochastic uncertainty, such as those similar to the ones included in the Level 1 PSA models, e.g., equipment random failures) are calculated using methods consistent with similar events in the Level 1 PSA.  Event probabilities which represent uncertainty about deterministic outcomes (i.e. events representing so-called Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 67 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? epistemic uncertainty, such as the likelihood of structural failure due to temperature and pressure loads from an energetic event) are assigned based on a clear and consistent method. to assign event probabilities, the rationale for numerical values chosen is clearly described and applied consistently throughout the Level 2 PSA. If expert judgment is used In cases where APET probability values represent uncertainty about deterministic outcomes, the analyses performed to generate have:  Identified the relevance of the defined severe accident time frames and has taken this into account adequately  Used up-to-date information on accident phenomenology.  Justified the applicability of the sources of information used.  Used facility-specific information wherever possible.  Used an acceptable analysis method for example, decomposition event trees, Monte Carlo simulation, or another method justified as adequate. -  Been performed in a transparent and consistent manner. APET drawings are included. Computer files for the APETs are provided. System design, operability and survivability modelling is described clearly and justified. In cases where the environment or operating conditions for system(s) exceed their design or qualification limits, assumptions on system design, operability and survivability are explicitly stated. A process is in place to ensure that these assumptions are captured to support the future system design, installation and qualification. Table A1-3.5 Source Term Analysis The parameters that influence fission product release, retention and transport through each of the major barriers to the environment are identified explicitly. The attributes that define the characteristics of the radiological releases and potential off-site consequences are identified explicitly. The attributes required in order to perform a Level 3 PSA are identified explicitly, e.g. magnitude of radionuclides, isotopic composition, release timing, height and frequency of the release, physical and chemical characteristics of the release, heat content of the release (plume), etc. Based on the above, an adequate set of release categories (RCs) has Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 68 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? been defined and justified, each one representing a different way of radiological release. The time periods considered for the release and the rationale for their choice are transparent and adequate. The characterisation of each RC is clear. All the attributes relevant to each RC are identified explicitly. The identification and characterisation of RCs is adequate. A sufficient number of RCs has been defined to avoid masking important source terms while maintaining a manageable scope for the analysis. The method or criteria used to group the severe accident sequences from the APETs into the defined RCs is stated explicitly and is justified. The process of mapping the resulting severe accident sequences from the APETs to the relevant RCs is transparent. If the binning process (allocation of sequences to end state categories) is automated, an auditable record exists of this process. No errors are identified in the grouping of severe accident sequences into the defined RCs. Each RC has been assigned a frequency equal to the summed frequency of all the severe accident sequences in the group. Each RC provides an adequate representation of the individual sequences within the group. The code and inputs meet ONR quality expectations as described in Table A1-1.4 of this Appendix. The modelling method/s used to perform source term analysis are clear. The radionuclide grouping scheme used for the source term analysis is consistent with current state-of-the-art practice. All the assumptions made to obtain source terms are described and justified. The computer code calculations used as the basis for estimating facility-specific source terms for selected accident sequences are documented. If there are cases where facility-specific computer code calculations were not performed, the method by which source terms have been estimated is described and justified. Also the relationship between the deterministic accident progression analyses and deterministic source term analyses are clearly described and justified. A set of sensitivity analyses has been performed to explore the Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 69 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? impact of the assumptions made in the source terms analysis. The source term analyses are thoroughly documented and fully traceable. The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset of the source term analyses. In these cases no significant errors have been found. The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative subset of source term analyses. In these cases, the results obtained are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder. Table A1-3.6 Quantification of the Level 2 PSA The quantification process is adequately documented and reproducible. The quantification setup, settings and any approximations are adequately documented. The quantification results are reproducible. Any cut-offs used for the quantification are documented and adequate. Any minimal cutset editing or other post-processing performed is transparent and reproducible. To the extent relevant, descriptions are provided of the way in which circular logic has been removed for any systems modified or developed for the Level 2 PSA. Complete results of the quantification are provided, including:  Minimal cutsets with numerical results and description of the basic events.  Basic event importance measures.  Importances for relevant groups of components or basic events.  Contribution of significant accident sequences to the Release Categories and risk metrics. Results are summarised at different levels (to the extent consistent with the scope of the PSA):  Full power operation  Low power and shutdown  Individual initiating event groups  Hazards during power operation and non-power conditions  Plant operational states  Point in time risk for each operational state (to support ALARP) Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 70 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? A review of results has been carried out to confirm their correctness. A review of why the risk profile is similar or different to that of similar plants has been performed, to the extent practicable given the availability of results for similar plants. The treatment of success branches is sufficiently accurate and the approach taken is justified, especially for headings where failure probabilities are large. The summated total RC frequency (including RCs with minimal or no release) has been compared to the Level 1 CDF. A justification is provided that the magnitude of any differences is acceptable. Any significant differences are explained. Uncertainties are propagated to generate uncertainty bounds on the RC results and on the values of the risk metrics generated. Uncertainty propagation includes both Level 1 and Level 2 uncertainties. The Level 2 and Level 1 models may use event probabilities which represent random events (sometimes referred to as aleatory events) and event probabilities that represent uncertainties about deterministic outcomes (sometimes referred to as epistemic events). The distinction between these types of events is recognised in the uncertainty propagation and uncertainty distributions are assigned following a method that is appropriate to the type of event. For aleatory events, the method used to generate uncertainty distributions is consistent with the methods applied in the Level 1. Deviations from or inconsistencies with the Level 1 methodology are described and justified. For epistemic events, the method used to generate uncertainty distributions used in for the uncertainty propagation takes account of the uncertainty information and modelling used to generate the mean values for those events. The assigned distribution is consistent with that modelling. 1/0 (or double delta) sampling (for binary or multiple branchings) is used where appropriate; otherwise the approach used is explained, justified and mathematically sound. Where different events modelled in the Level 2 PSA depend on shared or similar parameters, the effect of the correlation introduced by these parameters is modelled unless a justification is provided that the correlation is not significant or is adequately bounded. If the latter bounding approach is used, a justification is provided that the realism of the overall models is not compromised. Table A1-3.7 Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 2 PSA Results The Level 2 PSA results are clearly and thoroughly presented in the PSA documentation. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 71 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations provide a high degree of confidence that the overall conclusions obtained from the Level 2 PSA are valid. A summary of the Level 2 PSA results together with accompanying discussions is included. This summary is sufficient for PSA and non- PSA specialists to get a clear understanding of the risk of the defined categories of radioactive releases, where this risk comes from and which are the most significant uncertainties. A clear explanation is included of why the results of the Level 2 PSA are considered valid despite the identified uncertainties. All vulnerabilities identified by the Level 2 PSA are documented explicitly. The corrective actions proposed to address the vulnerabilities are clear. An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed corrective actions has been carried out and is documented explicitly. This has been used as the basis for assigning a level of priority to these proposals. A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective actions are captured, as appropriate, in the NPP design or design modification processes, or in the NPP process for procedure development or modification, etc. A demonstration that the risk of radioactive release for the NPP is ALARP is included. 4. Table A1-4. Level 3 PSA Table A1-4.1 Assessment of the Level 3 analysis The interfaces between the output of the Level 2 PSA and the input to the Level 3 PSA (approach and code/s used) are consistent. The end-point(s) of the Level 3 PSA are unambiguously stated and the scope is clearly defined. The range of consequences addressed by the Level 3 PSA and the way in which these consequences are to be presented are identified. These are adequate to allow comparison against the relevant targets in the SAPs The calculation methods used in the Level 3 PSA are auditable and reflect the current state of knowledge. These include:  The method(s) used to address the relevant phenomena and pathways, e.g. for calculation of atmospheric dispersion, surface deposition, re-suspension, migration through food chains, etc.  The method(s) used for the calculation of dose (external from irradiation, inhalation, irradiation irradiation from Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 72 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? ingestion).  The method(s) used for the calculation of health effects (deterministic, stochastic somatic, stochastic hereditary).  The method(s) used for the calculation of the economic consequences.  The selection and justification of parameter values. The sources of specific items of data needed to perform probabilistic consequence analysis (meteorological, population, agricultural production, land, food distribution data, etc) are auditable and valid. The approach used for meteorological sampling is appropriate. The data used is up-to-date. The site-specific data used to perform the consequence calculations is auditable. Assumptions made are justified. The input information used in the Level 3 PSA calculations regarding countermeasures and protective actions is stated. The countermeasure strategies modelled are either reasonable bounding assumed strategies (in which case the countermeasures are feasible and consistent with national requirements) or are based on the NPP’s existing emergency plan. Where default data provided by the code is used, its applicability is justified explicitly. The usage of default data is documented in an auditable fashion. The method by which the full spectrum of severe accident source terms generated in the Level 2 PSA are linked to a limited number of actual consequences in the Level 3 PSA is documented and auditable. The calculations performed are auditable. The computational process used to integrate the entire PSA model (Level 1 through Level 3) is appropriate. Sensitivity analyses have been performed and are documented. The sensitivity analyses capture key assumptions and combinations of assumptions. Uncertainties associated with the input parameters have been quantified using an acceptable method. Based on the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations, an understanding has been gained of which parametric and modelling uncertainties contribute most to the overall uncertainty in the results Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 73 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? of the Level 3 PSA. This analysis is documented. The results of the uncertainty and sensitivity evaluations demonstrate that the overall conclusions obtained from the L3 PSA are still valid. The regulator may choose to review in depth a representative subset of Level 3 calculations. In these cases no significant errors have been found. The regulator may choose to independently perform a representative subset of Level 3 calculations. In these cases, the results obtained are consistent with those presented by the dutyholder. Table A1-4.2 Presentation and Interpretation of the Level 3 PSA Results The Level 3 PSA results are clearly presented in the PSA documentation. A summary of the Level 3 PSA results together with accompanying discussions is included. This summary is sufficient for PSA and non- PSA specialists to get a clear understanding of the risk of various types of consequences, where this risk comes from and which are the most significant uncertainties. A clear explanation is included of why the results of the Level 3 PSA are considered valid despite the identified uncertainties. All issues or vulnerabilities identified by the Level 3 PSA are documented explicitly. The corrective actions proposed to address the vulnerabilities are clear. An evaluation of the risk improvements expected from the proposed corrective actions has been carried out and is documented explicitly. This has been used as the basis for assigning a level of priority to these proposals. A formal process is in place to ensure that the proposed corrective actions are captured, as appropriate, in the emergency procedures and arrangements A demonstration that the individual and societal risks from the facility under evaluation are ALARP is included. 5. Table A1-5 Overall Conclusions from the PSA The PSA is documented thoroughly. The PSA documentation enables the event and fault tree model, assumptions and quantification results to be traceable to the design documentation, drawings, analyses, operating procedures, and any other supporting information. All aspects of the PSA have been subject to sufficient level of independent review by the dutyholder to provide confidence in its technical adequacy. These reviews are documented. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 74 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The PSA has a credible and defensible basis. The PSA reflects the design of the NPP at the freeze date. The PSA reflects the operation of the NPP up to the freeze date. A process is in place to ensure that the assumptions regarding design and operation of the facility reflected in the PSA are captured in the development of future procedures, policies and strategies, design, design modifications and back-fits, etc. The PSA is fully accepted by the NPP operator. A process is in place to keep the PSA living, i.e. to be updated as necessary (at least every three years) to reflect the current design and operational features / practices and to incorporate feedback from internal and external operational experience, improved understanding of physical processes or accident progression and advances in modelling techniques. The PSA has enabled a judgement to be made as to the acceptability of the overall risk of the facility against the SAPs numerical targets, and in particular targets 7 (individual risk) and 9 (societal risk). The PSA has demonstrated that a balanced design has been achieved, such that no particular class of accident or feature of the facility makes a disproportionate contribution to the overall risk. The PSA has been used effectively to demonstrate that the risk associated with the design and operation of the NPP is ALARP 6. Table A1-6. Use of PSA to Support Decision-Making Note: This table is only generic. Detailed guidance on how to review specific PSA applications will be added as appendices to this TAG. Alternatively, stand-alone TAGs will be released for each application. Table A1-6.1 Expected uses of PSA The PSA has been used to support the NPP design process. There is evidence that this has been done iteratively, i.e. that the PSA has been used to inform all the stages of the design. The PSA has been used to support design modifications and back- fits, including the analyses of options considered during the preparatory stages of modifications projects. The PSA has been used to provide an input to the development of, and changes to, operating rules / technical specifications and testing, inspection and maintenance schedules of the NPP. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 75 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? The PSA has been used to provide an input to the optimal planning of testing, inspection and maintenance activities and to the daily management of plant configuration (i.e. when releasing plant for testing, inspection or maintenance). The PSA has provided an input to the justification for any change to the way in which the facility is operated. The PSA has been used to produce performance measures to demonstrate that the NPP is operated in such a way as to ensure that the numerical risk is kept ALARP. The PSA is used to understand the risk significance of any abnormal occurrences at the NPP and to identify measures to avoid future re- occurrences of safety significant events. The PSA has been used to support and inform Periodic Safety Reviews of the Facility. The PSA has been used to support development of, and changes to, operating procedures for managing all stages of incidents and accidents (including severe accidents). The PSA has been used to provide an input to the design of, and changes to, operator-training programmes for management of incidents and accidents (including severe accidents). The results of the PSA have been used to provide an input for off-site emergency planning and response including a demonstration of the effectiveness of countermeasures. The issue being evaluated using the PSA is explicitly defined. The type of results required as input to the decision-making are identified up-front. Any applicable numerical criteria are identified up-front. (In general, the inspector should expect that the impact of the issue on the overall risk should have been addressed by evaluating the Core Damage Frequency, Large Release Frequency, and Societal Risk). All aspects of the PSA model and data potentially affected by the issue under study are identified explicitly. All aspects of the PSA model and data identified as being potentially affected by the issue under study have been analysed for impact and modified if necessary. The analysis is transparent. The modifications are adequate. Table A1-6.2 Quality of the safety submissions supported by PSA Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 76 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? All the assumptions in the PSA have been checked for validity against the issue under study and modified if appropriate. The analysis is documented explicitly. Sensitivity analyses have been carried out to evaluate the sensitivity of the risk to changes in relevant assumptions and areas of modelling uncertainty. The analyses are documented explicitly. Sensitivity analyses have been carried out to check the risk impact of different options under consideration. The analyses are documented explicitly. Sensitivity analyses have been performed to address ‘what if’ scenarios. The analyses are documented explicitly. The results of the sensitivity analyses have been used to inform the final decision. The way in which the final decision has been informed by the results of the sensitivity analyses is transparent. Uncertainties in input probability and frequency values have been estimated and propagated through the models to generate uncertainty distributions on the resulting risk figures. The means resulting from the uncertainty propagation have been compared against the numerical criteria relevant to the application (rather than using the point estimate means which result from a simple arithmetic evaluation of the PSA cutsets). Based on the results of the sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, it has been shown that the most important modelling and parametric uncertainties have been minimised, or that the results of the application are not affected by these uncertainties, or that the decision based on the results of the application takes account of the uncertainties by application of the precautionary principle (as described in R2P2). Details of this are documented explicitly. If the issue under study affects aspects of the risk not covered within the scope of the existing PSA. These limitations in the PSA in relation to the issue under evaluation have been recognised and identified explicitly. In such cases, the PSA models have been adequately extended and / or enhanced to cover the missing aspects. The new models and data are adequate. If extending the PSA is considered not to be practicable (e.g., due to time constraints), the risk impact of the issue associated with areas outside the scope of the existing PSA has been analysed qualitatively. The analysis of this is transparent and adequate. The outcome of the PSA studies performed to evaluate issues is Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 77 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation ASSESSMENT EXPECTATION MET? clear, comprehensive and traceable. The outcome of the PSA studies performed to evaluate issues includes the following:  A description of the issue under study.  A description of the PSA evaluations undertaken including any numerical criteria established.  A description of the new (or modified) assumptions.  A description of the modifications to models and data and relevant drawings. issue.  The identification of key areas of uncertainty in relation to the  Relevant numerical results.  Lists of cutsets and importance measures.  Risk profile (identification of dominant initiating events, accident sequences, and protection failures).  Results of the sensitivity and uncertainty analyses and conclusions obtained from these.  Qualitative risk arguments used.  A clear interpretation of all information above and unambiguous systematic application of decision-making criteria applied to the results of the PSA evaluations. recommendations based on a the Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 78 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation 10. APPENDIX 2 – NS-TAST-GD-030 – MAPPING BETWEEN ISSUE O (PROBABILISTIC SAFETY ANALYSIS) OF THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS AND THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS TAG TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS TAG COMMENTS describes 4.5 SAP FA.12 Note: a Level 3 PSA is required to address some of the numerical targets of the SAPs are spread Specific, detailed requirements to address scope and level in PSAs for NPPs throughout Appendix 1, e.g. Tables A1-1.2, A1- 2.1, A1-2.7.1, A1-2.8 and A1-5 (paragraph starting The PSA has enabled…) (ISSUE O) 1. Scope and content of PSA level 2, operational 1.1 For each plant design, a specific PSA shall be developed for level 1 considering all and relevant58 states, covering fuel in the core and in the spent fuel storage and all relevant internal and external initiating events. External hazards shall be included in the PSA for level 1 and level 2 as far as practicable, taking into account the current state of If not science and practicable, other justified meth- odologies shall be used to evaluate the contribution of external hazards to the overall risk profile of the plant. technology. 1.2 PSA shall dependencies. include relevant 4.6 (Sections 2 and 3) starting Specific requirements to address dependencies in PSAs for NPPs are spread throughout Appendix 1, e.g. Table A1-2.3.2 (paragraph starting “All dependencies…”, Table A1- 2.4.1 paragraph “The general approach for the inclusion on (hardware/software) common cause failure events…”. Table A1- 2.4.2 paragraph “The information on dependencies…” and paragraph starting “all intra- system and inter system common cause failures…) starting Specific requirements to perform sensitivity and uncertainty analyses in PSAs for NPPs are spread throughout Appendix 1, e.g. Table A1-2.9.1, and Table A1-3.6. See also Tables A1-3.i for expectations on sensitivity and uncertainty analyses in the Level 2 PSA 1.3 The Level 1 PSA shall contain sensitivity and uncertainty analyses. The Level 2 PSA shall contain sensitivity as appropriate, uncertainty analyses. analyses and, 4.6 Section 4, 4.7 1.4 PSA shall be based on a realistic modelling plant of 4.6 Section 2 Specific requirements to ensure that in PSAs for NPPs the models and Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 79 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS TAG COMMENTS (ISSUE O) response, using data relevant for the design, and taking into account human action the extent assumed in operating and accident procedures. The mission times in the PSA shall be justified. to 1.5 Human reliability analysis shall be performed, taking into account the factors which can influence the performance of the operators in all plant states 2. Quality of PSA 2.1 PSA shall be performed, and maintained documented, quality according management the licensee. the system to of 2.2 PSA shall be performed according to an up to date proven methodology, taking into account international experience currently available. 3. Use of PSA 3.1 PSA shall be used to support safety management. The role of PSA in the decision making process shall be defined. 4.7 3.2 PSA shall be used to identify the need for modifications to the plant and its procedures, including for severe accident management measures, in order to reduce the risk from the plant. data are realistic are spread throughout Appendix 1, e.g. Table A1-2.2 and A1-2.6. Table A1-2.3.2 includes specific expectations for mission times (as does SAP para 652) requirements Specific the Human Reliability Analysis in PSAs for NPPs are included in Table A1- 2.5 for 4.6 Section 3 3.6, 4.11, 4.12, 4.15 LC 17 licensee QA system requires an appropriate 2.5, 4.11 The TAG taken as a whole will ensure that the PSA is performed according to an up to date proven methodology. A large amount of International is embodied in the TAG (see A1-4 and A1-5) experience 4.7. Section 1 Specific expectations are included in Table A1-2.9.3, A1-3.6, and A1- 6.1. risk from the plant, 3.3 PSA shall be used to assess the overall to demonstrate that a balanced design has been achieved, and to provide confidence that there are no "cliff- edge effects". 4.3 Section 2 see also SAP FA.25 and paras 676 and 677 for “cliff edge effects” 3.4 PSA shall be used to assess the adequacy of plant modifications, 4.7. Section 1 Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 80 of 81 Office for Nuclear Regulation TABLE A2: COMPARISON WITH THE WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS TAG COMMENTS (ISSUE O) changes to operational limits and conditions and procedures and to assess of operational occurrences. significance the input 3.5 Insights from PSA shall be used as to development and validation of the safety significant training the licensee, including simulator training of control room operators. programmes of 4.7. Section 1 3.6 The results of PSA shall be used to ensure that the items are included in the verification and test programmes they contribute significantly to risk. if 4.7. Section 1 4. Demands and conditions on the use of PSA 4.7. Section 2 4.7. Section 2 4.7. Section 1 4.1 The limitations of PSA shall be understood, recognized and taken into account in all its use. The adequacy of a particular PSA application shall always be checked with respect to these limitations. or changing is used, for 4.2 When PSA the evaluating testing requirements on periodic and allowed outage for a time system or a component, all relevant items, including states of systems and safety functions they participate in, shall be included in the analysis. components and 4.3 The operability of components that have been found by PSA to be important to safety shall be ensured and their role shall be recorded in the SAR. Report : NS-TAST-GD-030 CM9 Ref: 2018/408246 Page 81 of 81 ns-tast-gd-060.pdf
 Title of document OFFICIAL ONR GUIDE 1. Procedure Design and Administrative Controls Document Type: Nuclear Safety Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: NS-TAST-GD-060 Revision 3 Date Issued: November 2017 Review Date: November 2020 Approved by: E Vinton Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 1.1.3.776. (2017/438046) Revision commentary: Revision TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION ......................... 3 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS, AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS ....................................................................................................................... 3 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 5 6. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 14 7. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 15 8. ANNEXE A ......................................................................................................................... 16 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 11/17 NS-TAST-GD-060 - Revision 3 Page 1 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation INTRODUCTION The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established its Safety Assessment Principles (SAPs) which apply to the assessment by ONR specialist inspectors of safety cases for nuclear facilities that may be operated by potential licensees, existing licensees, or other duty-holders. The principles presented in the SAPs are supported by a suite of guides to further assist ONR’s inspectors in their technical assessment work in support of making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guide (TAG) is one of these guides. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ONR has the responsibility for regulating the safety of nuclear installations in Great Britain. The SAPs for Nuclear Facilities [1] provide a framework to guide regulatory decision-making in the nuclear permissioning process. The SAPs are supported by TAGs which further aid the decision-making process. This TAG provides guidance to aid Inspectors in the interpretation and application of SAPs related to procedure design and the use of administrative controls, specifically SAPs EHF.4 and EHF.9. It also assists with the application of other SAPs which set out expectations regarding administrative safety measures and procedures designed and implemented by a dutyholder, including those related to compliance with Operating Rules. The TAG provides broad expectations on key points that the experienced Human Factors (HF) Inspector may wish to consider when judging whether a licensee’s procedures and administrative safety controls are designed and implemented effectively. This TAG is not intended to be a detailed design guide for procedures and administrative controls; nor does it prescribe specific methods and approaches for assessing them or offer guidance on how to judge the adequacy of their technical content. Inspectors should exercise their own judgement and discretion in the depth and scope to which they apply the guidance, but should be cognisant of the safety reliance that is placed on human action and the contribution that failure to implement the administrative controls and procedures makes to risk. Procedures and Administrative Control SAP EKP.5 sets out a hierarchy of preferred options for delivering safety functions and maintaining the plant within its safe operating envelope. The SAP identifies the preference for passive safety measures, but sets out alternatives including the use of administrative safety measures where an engineered control is not possible or reasonably practicable to implement. Where administrative safety measures are proposed, the safety case should include a robust justification demonstrating why alternative measures are not reasonably practicable, and showing that claims on the administrative safety measure can be substantiated. Procedures form an essential part of any administrative safety measure. The mechanisms in place to ensure that procedures are designed in accordance with good practice HF guidelines, such that they support the end user and reflect safety case requirements will influence the reliability with which safety significant tasks are controlled and should form part of the substantiation. Administrative safety measures may be defined as Operating Instructions in accordance with Licence Condition (LC) 24(1). 1. 1.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 2 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation Definitions 2.6 This TAG uses the term ‘procedures’ to refer to all written instructions that describe the way in which operations affecting safety should be carried out. The term ‘Operating Instruction’ is used within LC 24. Licensees use a range of terminology for LC 24 operating instructions and this term is generally taken to mean, but is not limited to, procedures. As much of what is carried out on operating sites is controlled by lower level documents that support ‘operating instructions’ the term ‘procedures’ has been used to indicate the broader application of the guidance within this TAG. 2.7 Administrative control within this TAG refers to a safety measure that is claimed to maintain operations within the plant’s safe operating envelope derived from the safety case, and which is implemented by operator action 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LICENCE AND OTHER RELEVANT LEGISLATION 3.1 3.2 3.3 The Nuclear Site LCs [2] place legal requirements on the licensee to make and implement arrangements to ensure that safety is being adequately managed. The licence conditions provide a legal framework which can be drawn on in assessment. LCs 23 (limits and conditions in the interests of safety) and 24 (Operating Instructions) particularly apply. Also of relevance are LCs 14 and 15 (preparation and review of safety cases), LC 11 (emergency arrangements), LC 17 (quality management), and LC 28 (examination, inspection, maintenance and testing). Most other licence conditions also touch on the topic of procedures and administrative controls. Procedures providing guidance and instruction to staff are instrumental in ensuring that all activities throughout the life cycle of an installation are carried out reliably and efficiently such that the potential for introduction of errors is minimised. Regulation 3(1) of The Management of Health and Safety Work Regulations 1999 places a legal requirement on dutyholders to produce suitable and sufficient risk assessments and Regulation 4 the requirement to introduce preventive and protective measures to control risk. In order to be considered suitable and sufficient, such assessments may need to identify and consider the need for and influence of, suitable and sufficient procedures and administrative controls as part of the dutyholder’s measures for controlling risk. 4. RELATIONSHIP TO SAPS, WENRA REFERENCE LEVELS, AND IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS 4.1 SAPS ONR’s expectations concerning the adequacy of administrative controls and procedures are set out in a number of SAPs. The primary references relating to procedures and administrative controls are contained in the following SAPs [1]: 4.2 EHF.4. Identification of administrative controls: “Administrative controls used to remain within the safe operating envelope should be systematically identified”. 4.3 Para 448 expands upon EHF.4: The design of these controls should be such that the requirements for personnel action are clearly identified and unambiguous to those responsible for their implementation. 4.4 EHF.9 Procedures NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 3 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation “Procedures should be produced to support reliable human performance during activities that could impact on safety”. 4.5 Para 458 expands upon EHF.9: Procedures should be accurate and designed and presented in a format that is compatible with the needs of the end user and suitable for the task that they are designed to support. References to procedures and administrative controls, either implicit or explicit, are also noted throughout the SAPs in general, and these are presented in Annexe A. WENRA Reactor Safety Reference Levels The objective of The Western European Nuclear Regulators Association (WENRA) is to develop a common approach to nuclear safety in Europe by comparing national approaches to the application of International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safety standards. The guidance in this TAG is consistent with the following harmonisation issues from the WENRA Reactor Safety Reference levels [3], which represent good practices in the WENRA member states, are relevant and should be taken into account by the inspector: • Issue H: Operational Limits and Conditions (OLCs). • Issue K: Maintenance, In-Service Inspection and Functional Testing. • Issue L/M: Emergency Operating Procedures and Severe Accident Management Guidelines. • Issue O: Probabilistic Safety Analysis (PSA). • Issue Q: Plant Modifications. • Issue S: Protection against Internal Fires. IAEA Safety Standards The guidance is also consistent with the following IAEA safety requirements and guidance: NS-R-2: Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Operation Safety Requirements, 2000 [4] SSR-2/2: Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Commissioning and Operation Specific Safety Requirements, 2016 [5]. NS-G-2.4: The Operating Organisation for Nuclear Power Plants Safety Guide, 2001 [6]. NS-G-2.14: Conduct of Operations at Nuclear Power Plants Safety Guide, 2008 [7]. 4.10 The IAEA Safety Standards (Requirements and Guides) were the benchmark for the revision of the SAPs in 2014 and are recognised by ONR as relevant good practice. They should therefore be consulted, where relevant, by the Inspector. 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 4 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 5.1 Introduction LC 24 requires that all operations which may affect safety are carried out in accordance with written instructions. The licensee should be able to demonstrate that its administrative controls and procedures are designed and implemented such that they support reliable human performance of actions that keep the plant within the safe operating envelope. The guidance provided in this section can be used to assess all types of procedures and administrative controls. General Expectations Inspectors should seek to gain confidence that safety claims made upon administrative controls and procedures can be substantiated. This may involve considering: 5.2 • • • • the dutyholder’s process for identifying the need for administrative controls and procedural support within the safety case; its capability – often embedded in its HF resource - to support effective specification and design of administrative controls and procedures, drawing upon a proportionate use of task analysis; the processes in place to ensure that administrative controls and procedures are implemented effectively and are subject to suitable management controls, for example configuration control and review of modifications; learning from experience, for example implementing appropriate improvements following events, feedback for personnel following use (during operation, training, drills, etc.), periodic reviews of safety, etc. Claims on administrative control should be identified and assessed from a HF perspective in all operating states commensurate with their risk. Where a high reliance is placed upon the administrative control, it would be expected that a detailed HF assessment involving the use of task analysis would be conducted and robust justification made for the usability and reliability of that control. ONR expects HF/ergonomics principles and practices to be incorporated in the design, specification, implementation and through-life management of procedures and administrative controls. It should be noted that procedures are only one of the factors affecting the reliability of operator action associated with implementation of administrative controls. Other factors such as Human-Machine Interface (HMI), task design, supervision and training will also be relevant, and the Inspector should recognise this when defining interventions. 5.3 5.4 Key elements for ensuring the provision of suitable and sufficient administrative control and procedures to support the safe operation of nuclear plant include explicit consideration of: • The nature of the task and human-based safety claim related to the delivery of • The safety goal to be achieved, administrative safety functions • The needs of the end user 5.5 Inspectors may consider whether: NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 5 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation • The dutyholder’s process for the identification of administrative control requirements draws upon the safety case and covers all plant operational modes/states including maintenance, testing and calibration activities, override facilities, fault and emergency response. • Where appropriate, the dutyholder’s administrative controls take into account the need to demonstrate compliance with conditions and limits necessary in the interests of safety; detect non-compliance and facilitate the successful performance of recovery actions. This includes factors such as supervision and surveillance tasks, compliance records, alarm set points, the communication of time constraints associated with non-compliance, operator awareness and training about the safety limits and conditions. • Administrative controls and the associated safety-related activities that operators need to carry out to achieve compliance with operating rules are clearly identified as such in operating instructions. The instructions clearly state what needs to done, when, by whom, under what circumstances, the success criteria for each activity and actions to be taken if an operating rule is breached. • The specification and design of administrative control (and procedures) is included as part of the dutyholder’s Human Factors Integration (HFI) process (see Technical Assessment Guide NS-TAST-GD-058 – Human Factors Integration [8]). • The dutyholder has declared and justified the standards/guidelines used for the design/modification and substantiation of its administrative controls. • The actions being claimed are o feasible, o potential for human error is identified and minimised to As Low As Reasonably Practicable (ALARP) and o the actions can be carried out with an appropriate level of reliability given the equipment, procedures and operator interfaces provided. • The dutyholder has considered each individual administrative control to consider management of safety issues that can contribute to the adequate implementation of the controls, such as competency assurance and management actions to ensure compliance. The following aspects should be evident in the dutyholder’s design of administrative controls: o Task requirements, potential for errors/violations and demands placed upon operators are clearly identified and understood; o Adequacy of the supporting systems, such as the interfaces and procedures that operators are reliant on to implement the administrative control; o Competence levels and training of operators to perform the task; o Task environment/context including Performance Shaping Factors and the prevailing safety culture to support operator performance. • The dutyholder’s arrangements include elements of evaluation, verification, validation and review. • The dutyholder has carried out an operational experience review (existing or similar plants), including a review of any simulations or mock-ups of its proposed administrative controls. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 6 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation • The dutyholder can demonstrate that the design and specification of administrative controls has been used as an input to the design of procedures and operator training needs/competence requirements. • The dutyholder has conducted suitable evaluation and testing/trials of the design, specification, implementation and use of administrative controls and procedures to demonstrate their effectiveness in the context of the safety case claims and assumptions. Dependency in claims on administrative control The impact of dependency on the reliability of the administrative control should be considered as this is an importance failure mechanism that is often overlooked or inadequately defended against. Whilst the design of administrative controls should aim to minimise dependency, it can be difficult to identify, or eliminate, all forms of dependency in human actions, such that claims on multiple human actions to offer high levels of protection are likely to be unrealistic. Claims on several ‘independent’ administrative controls in order to claim an unrealistically high level of protection should therefore be avoided. 5.7 Inspectors may consider whether: • The dutyholder has identified dependent failure mechanisms associated with its administrative controls and has implemented credible defences and mitigations against dependency where these effects are identified. Assessment of administrative controls This section provides general advice to the Inspector regarding good practice expectations for the assessment and substantiation of administrative controls. The guidance provided in T/AST/063 on Human Reliability Analysis is also relevant. 5.9 Inspectors may consider whether: 5.6 5.8 • Where a high reliance is placed on administrative control or it delivers an important safety function, the dutyholder has used task analysis and drawn upon end user input to understand the task and demonstrate the suitability, feasibility and reliability of the associated operator actions and managerial arrangements. These include but are not limited to: o The operating instructions and the extent to which they clearly and unambiguously prescribe any required actions and success criteria for the administrative controls. o Performance shaping factors and error mechanisms associated with context in which administrative controls are implemented including, where appropriate, the dynamic nature of these. o The provision of adequate human-system interfaces; in providing indication of safety-related parameters and their associated operating limits, whether in a central control room or local-to-plant. o Operator awareness of the required actions and their role as defined within the safety case. o Operator training and competence for the specific tasks to be performed. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 7 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation o The prevailing culture within the relevant parts of the operating organisation. • Where feasible, the dutyholder has used simulator trials to support the analysis of administrative controls. Alternatively, the dutyholder has conducted walk- through/talk-through or observation of the use of administrative controls to confirm that users are familiar with the controls and fluent in their use. Other Administrative Controls 5.10 The Inspector should note that administrative controls with an impact on safety extend beyond those directly involved in the execution of activities such as operations or maintenance. These include, for example, controls such as Permit to Work, use of waivers, temporary instructions etc. The Inspector should seek confidence that the licensee’s arrangements for these other controls are adequate. 5.11 Inspectors may consider whether: • The dutyholder has a system to identify and assess administrative controls indirectly or implicitly claimed to provide assurance of the level of protection assumed within the safety case. • The dutyholder has adequately substantiated the robustness and reliability of the following where they are claimed, either implicitly or explicitly, to provide adequate nuclear safety: o Administrative controls used for configuration and surveillance and maintenance of automatically initiated engineered safety systems. o Administrative controls used as a substitute for an engineered safety system e.g. during a planned or unplanned outage, or for short-term high risk activities. o Temporary instructions, workarounds and/or Permit-to-Work systems that may be used to implement temporary safety measures as an alternative to provide adequate safety during unplanned engineered safety system outages, or to act as the controls for non-routine hazardous activities. o Override facilities; safe use of overrides and vetoes is dependent on effective administrative control. Inspectors should check that the administrative control arrangements ensure that operators understand the plant state and any change in plant state associated with the requirement for and application of an override and that is recognised by all personnel who may at risk in order to avoid inadvertent actions being taken and unintentionally creating a significant hazard. • The dutyholder has adequate arrangements for conducting periodic audit to ensure that the level of control can be (and is being) maintained over a period of time. Procedures 5.12 This section is intended to supplement Technical Inspection Guide (TIG) NS-INSP-GD- 024 [9] (LC 24 Operating Instructions) rather than repeat the information contained therein. It is recommended that the reader also refers to NS-INSP-GD-024 as part of their inspection and/or assessment. General Expectations NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 8 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 5.13 All activities which may affect safety should be carried out in accordance with written procedures. However, carrying out activities in accordance with procedures does not necessarily mean that there must be a procedure in hand, followed step by step for every task. Decisions on the way that procedures are used to support consistent and reliable task performance must be based on the nature of the task, its safety significance, the potential for error and the experience of the user. The inspector should consider whether: • The dutyholder’s operating instructions are consistent with any operating rules they implement. This includes any procedures that provide indirect support to operating rules, such as those involved in the maintenance of safety related plant. • The dutyholder’s procedures define how plant should be brought back within operating rule limits and conditions if discovered to be outwith these. Management arrangements 5.14 It is also important for the inspector to recognise the role of lower level procedures in assuring safety, as the presence and use of these is often implicitly assumed within the safety case. The dutyholder is expected to consider the role of such procedures in delivering safety. Inspectors may consider whether: • The dutyholder has a controlled process for the production, maintenance, review, amendment and version control of procedures. Mechanisms are in place to ensure that the safety case is not undermined by subsequent changes to procedures and vice versa • The dutyholder has a process for validation and verification of procedures, which includes: end user involvement, consideration of the way they are used to confirm their technical accuracy and usability. • Consideration of assumptions within the safety case to ensure that the safety case is not undermined. • The dutyholder has a process of learning from experience to ensure procedures are appropriately revised based on use. Changes that are made as a result of this process should be evaluated to ensure that the procedure has delivered its intended improvement. • The dutyholder’s modification and change management process has the capacity to identify all design, organisational and safety case changes that may impact procedures and the process should have the capacity to identify procedures that are obsolete. • The dutyholder can demonstrate the suitability and sufficiency of the procedure to support safe and reliable task performance. For example, through implementation of a hierarchy of procedure classification relating to the safety significance of the operations, its complexity and frequency to inform the assignment of a category of procedure format, use and availability. This may include ‘use categories’ similar to the following: o Level 1 – Continuous use; where the procedure is ‘in-hand’ and referred to step by step each time the task is performed. o Level 2 – Reference use; the procedure is available at the work location and may be referred to periodically during the performance of a task and relevant blocks of task steps are verified to confirm that all steps have been completed. o Level 3 – Information use; the procedure is available for use as needed. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 9 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation • The dutyholder maintains accurate records to demonstrate compliance with operating procedures in line with LC 25(1) • The dutyholder’s procedures are clearly linked with the claims and assumptions in the safety case and the procedures have been developed based on the output of the Design Basis Analysis (DBA), PSA and Safety Assessment (SA), appropriate to the specific procedures. Procedure Design and Methods 5.15 The development of technically accurate and usable procedures will rely on the application of appropriate methods such as task analysis and on the quality of the verification and validation processes. Engaging procedure users in the development and amendment of procedures will also increase both the accuracy and validity of the procedure. The rigour applied to the development of procedures should reflect the relative contribution to safety of the task being controlled. The methods adopted should be appropriate to the nature of the task or process. 5.16 Inspectors may consider whether: • The dutyholder uses a systematic and defined process to develop procedures and this includes proportionate use of internal and/or external standards or guidelines and the practices listed below, to ensure the uptake of relevant good practice in procedure writing and to ensure consistency of presentation and format (see for example references [10], [11] & [12]). o Task analysis. o Desktop or walk-through/talk-through approaches, wherein operators use the procedures and verify their accuracy and suitability for the task and the options available to them at each step. o Simulator, or some other high fidelity method, is used wherever possible and in particular for post-fault actions. • The dutyholder has a responsive approach for updating procedures, from the user point of view. This is important to motivate change where it is needed. This process identifies the safety implications of such changes to ensure that the safety case is not undermined. • The dutyholder is able to demonstrate that the standard of procedures used by contractors is commensurate with what is expected from the dutyholder’s own internally developed procedures. • The dutyholder uses its procedures to inform the identification and delivery of competence and training needs associated with particular tasks to ensure that these are clearly defined and that associated procedures do not assume any knowledge and skill for which the user has not been trained and is competent to carry out. The process also includes any unfamiliar/infrequently used procedures e.g. annual maintenance instructions, fault and emergency response procedures. • The dutyholder has clearly identified roles and responsibilities with regard to procedures. There is a reasonably practicable process for ensuring that procedure compliance is assured and demonstrated and this covers management expectations about compliance. • The dutyholder’s procedures are provided in an appropriate format. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 10 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation o Procedures should provide suitable navigation aids and be consistent in their use of cautions, warnings, hold points and independent verification to control safety significant task steps. o A “one size fits all” approach to procedure formatting is unlikely to be appropriate. For example, an appropriate procedure format for use in normal operations might be very differently from one to be used following an accident / incident. Different formats might be appropriate to support the specific task requirements (e.g. sequential for normal operations, symptom-based for design base faults, state / event based for severe accidents, etc.). o Procedures should also support their users through the potential difficult transition between normal and abnormal conditions (and back again). It should be clear to the user the appropriate procedure they need to use in response to the specific scenario they face. o Where independent verification is used, it should be clear what is being checked and how, such that any sign-off is meaningful to the verifier. The procedure user should be made aware of the significance of the step through its clear demarcation within the procedure and through training. • The dutyholder can demonstrate an understanding of safety significant task steps in the procedures and any errors that may occur; these have been given consideration in the design and maintenance of procedure quality. Plant Commissioning Procedures 5.17 The general expectations for procedures, their design and methods of production equally apply to procedures that are used for commissioning. However, during commissioning operations are often performed with the plant in unusual and changing configurations. Procedures must still be available under such circumstances. Commissioning procedures are likely to be more detailed and require the bases of the contents of the procedure to be explicit. During later operation, once the procedures have been tested in use, this additional detail may no longer be required within the procedure itself. The dutyholder should detail the bases upon which the commissioning procedure content is decided and verified. This should also be linked to the safety case, training and competency assessments. Computerised Operating Procedures 5.18 Advances in digital technology are resulting in increasing availability of Computerised Operating Procedures (COPs), for assisting operators with various plant control tasks, fault diagnosis and response [13], [14]. The purpose of this section is to provide high level guidance to inspectors where the licensee proposes to use such systems. 5.19 ONR considers COPs to be any computer application that presents operating procedures/instructions through electronic, rather than printed, media. This is taken to include procedure-based automation whereby the evaluation and execution of a predefined sequence of procedure steps is carried out by a computerised operating system. 5.20 In their simplest form, computer-based procedures simply represent the procedure text in electronic form. This type of COPs may include the ability to call up another relevant procedure from a hyper-link in the procedure and allow the user to track progress through the procedure steps. More sophisticated COPs may automate the gathering and display of plant data relevant to a task and procedure step. They incorporate additional functionality such as automated data gathering and processing capability, evaluation of plant parameters and procedure step logic, and the display of the results NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 11 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation to the operator to support decision-making and/or prompt the operator to take a specific action. This type of COP may also provide links to soft controls where operators may take plant control actions. 5.21 Further advanced COPs include all the functionality above and also have the ability to issue plant control commands and automatically carry out a pre-defined sequence of procedure steps once authorised by the operator. This type of COP can make decisions as to whether and when to execute each step in the procedure sequence based on real time plant conditions. 5.22 Regardless of the type of COPs proposed by dutyholders, it is important to recognise that operators are responsible for the proper application of any procedures and COPs are an operator aid for controlling the plant. In the case of automatically executed actions it is expected that this is flagged to the operator in such way that he can reach a judgement on their suitability. Loss of an aid should not prevent the operator from performing any required safety and control actions. In addition, failure of COPs should not have any impact on safety systems or control systems. 5.23 The same general principles applied to the design of paper-based procedures also apply to COPs in terms of presentation principles, processes for updating, verifying and validating etc. However, there are other specific issues that must be addressed if COPs are to be used including the consideration of Human Machine Interface (HMI) and software design and verification [15] – [19]. (See also NS-TAST-GD-059 – Human Machine Interface [20]). 5.24 Where the dutyholder uses, or proposes to use, COPs, Inspectors may consider whether: • The choice and use of COPs is appropriate for the operational concept, tasks and safety functions to be delivered. • The COPs are designed and implemented such that operators remain in command of the plant and processes being operated. Operator pre-defined hold-points are included in the COP that defines the start and end of any automated sequences that are commanded by the operator. • The operator should be able to manually interrupt a COP execution safely and at any point in a sequence of steps. Any automatic interrupts include a salient alerting function and identify the cause of why the sequence has stopped. The operator should be able to revert to manual control or resume automatic procedure execution if desired. • COPs provide adequate information on initial plant conditions that must be met before any automated sequence may be started. • COPs that process plant data and evaluate procedure-step logic can only make deterministic decisions (e.g. yes/no) and all data evaluated by a COP is available to the operator. The results evaluated by the COP are the same as those expected from operator evaluations of the same procedure steps. • Failure modes or loss of the COP can be readily detected and identified by operators and these do not affect the operator’s ability to safely recover and operate the plant. • COPs should not determine what procedure should be used; the operator should decide what procedure to be used for a given task in any given situation. • Suitable back-up procedures are accessible and available (alternate COPs or paper-based procedures) in case of COP failure. The structure and format of NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 12 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation the information in the back-up procedures is consistent and compatible with that in the COP. Consideration has been given to the feasibility of the means of transition to back-up procedures. The time required for the operator to effectively transfer to back-up procedures should be known and demonstrated to be feasible within required timeframes determined in the safety case. After transferring to a back up procedure the operator should be able to safely stop the processing of the COP. • COPs should be commanded and controlled by a single dedicated operator with multiple read-only facilities displaying the COP elsewhere to assist the operating team/crew situational awareness. • COPs provide adequate feedback to operators informing them of what the current state of procedure execution is and what the system being controlled is doing. • The COPs conspicuously display the current system mode and have the ability to alert the operator should an unexpected mode or state change occur. • The characteristics and behaviours of any embedded soft controls in a COP are consistent and compatible with other plant controls and user expectations. • There is a robust COP management and configuration control process to ensure that COP content and functionality are fully verified and validated prior to use and following any changes. This process also ensures that consistency is maintained between COPs and back-up procedures. This process should meet good practice expectations and standards for Control, Electrical and Instrumentation (CE&I) systems. • The dutyholder has addressed the issue of the safety integrity level requirements of the data display upon which the operator is required to respond. The HF inspector should consult with the relevant Fault Studies and CE&I discipline inspectors regarding substantiation of reliability claims. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 13 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 6. REFERENCES 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Safety Assessment Principles for Nuclear Facilities. 2014 Edition Revision 0. ONR. November 2014. http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/saps2014.pdf. Licence condition handbook. ONR. February 2017. http://www.onr.org.uk/silicon.pdf WENRA Reactor Reference Safety Levels. Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association. Reactor Harmonization Group. WENRA. September 2014. www.wenra.org. IAEA Safety Standards, Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Operation Safety Requirements, NS-R-2, IAEA, 2000. http://www-pub.iaea.org/books/ IAEA Safety Standards, Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design, SSR-2/2 (Rev. 1), IAEA, 2016. http://www-pub.iaea.org/books/ IAEA Safety Standards, The Operating Organisation for Nuclear Power Plants Safety Guide, NS-G-2.4, IAEA, 2001. http://www-pub.iaea.org/books/ IAEA Safety Standards, Conduct of Operations at Nuclear Power Plants, Safety Guide, NS-G-2.14, IAEA, 2008. http://www-pub.iaea.org/books/ ONR How2 Business Management System. Human Factors Integration. NS-TAST-GD- 058, Revision 3. ONR. March 2017. http://www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_asst_guides/index.htm ONR How2 Business Management System. LC 24 Operating Instructions, NS-INSP- GD-024, Revision 3, ONR, February 2016. http://www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_insp_guides/index.htm 10 Good practices with respect to the development and use of nuclear power plant procedures, IAEA-TECDOC-1058, IAEA, 1998. 11 Writer’s Guide for Technical Procedures. DOE-STD-1029-92, U.S. Department of Energy, December 1998. Procedures, Human Factors Briefing Note 4, HSE. www.hse.gov.uk/humanfactors/topics/04procedures.pdf Computer-based Procedure Systems: Technical Basis and Human Factors Review Guidance. NUREG/CR-6634, USNRC, March 2000. Human Factors Considerations with Respect to Emerging Technology in Nuclear Power Plants, NUREG/CR-6947, USNRC, October 2008. Human – System Interface Design Review Guidelines, NUREG 0700 Rev 2, May 2002. IAEA SAFETY GUIDE - Design of Instrumentation and Control Systems for Nuclear Power Plants, Standards Series No. SSG-39, IAEA, Vienna, 2016. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1694_web.pdf Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety-related systems, IEC 61508, International Electrotechnical Commission. The Use of Computers in Safety-Critical Applications. Final Report of the Study Group on the Safety of Operational Computer Systems. HSE Books ISBN 9780717616206 Implementing Digital Instrumentation and Control Systems in the Modernisation of Nuclear Power Plants No. NP-T-1.4. IAEA, Vienna, 2009, http://www- pub.iaea.org/books/ ONR How2 Business Management System. Human Machine Interface, NS-TAST-GD- 059, Revision 3, ONR, November 2016. http://www.onr.org.uk/operational/tech_asst_guides/index.htm NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 14 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 7. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS Control, Electrical and Instrumentation Computerised Operating Procedure Design Basis Analysis Human Factors Human Factors Integration Human Machine Interface International Atomic Energy Agency Licence Condition Operational Limit(s) and Condition(s) Office for Nuclear Regulation Probabilistic Safety Analysis Safety Assessment Safety Assessment Principle(s) Technical Assessment Guide(s) Technical Inspection Guide(s) CE&I COP DBA HF HFI HMI IAEA LC OLC ONR PSA SA SAP TAG TIG WENRA Western European Nuclear Regulators’ Association NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 15 of 16 Office for Nuclear Regulation 8. ANNEXE A SAP EHF.5 Human Factors: Task Area FA.6 FA.9 Analysis Fault analysis: Design basis analysis Fault analysis: Design basis analysis FA.14 Use of PSA AM.1 Accident management: Design and operation EMT.5 Engineering principles: maintenance, inspection and testing EMT.6 Engineering principles: maintenance, inspection and testing SC.4(h) The regulatory SC.6 MS.2 MS.4 assessment of safety cases: Safety case characteristics The regulatory assessment of safety cases: Safety case characteristics Leadership and management for safety: Capable organisation Leadership and management for safety: Learning from experience EKP.5 Key principles: Safety measures ERL.3 Reliability claims: Engineered safety features Relevance to this TAG In supporting task performance and providing the basis for the design of procedures. Claims on operator actions to be supported by procedures, and compliance with procedures assured. Design Based Assessment input to limits and conditions for safe operation; and the identification of requirements for operator actions, and input to operating instructions. Use of PSA in developing and changing operating procedures. Procedures contribution to accident management and emergency preparedness. Inspection and test procedures Testing, maintaining, monitoring and inspecting and relevance of operating rules and instructions. Operating and maintenance instructions; rules and contingency and emergency instructions, in relation to the management for safety and the safety case. The safety case in relation to maintenance, inspection and testing regimes; operating limits and conditions; emergency planning. The design of procedures and the factors that affect reliable performance of the organisation. Learning from errors in safety procedures and processes; monitoring, review and audit of procedures; testing and validation of safety procedures. Safety assured by: Passive safety measures in preference to automatically initiated engineered safety measures, in preference to engineered safety measures that need to be manually brought into service in response to the fault in preference to administrative safety measures. Minimise the dependence on human action to maintain a safe state. Use administrative control for less demanding or longer timescale. NS-TAST-GD-060 TRIM Ref: 2017/438046 Page 16 of 16 cns-tast-gd-4.1.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

PROCUREMENT AND INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/104195) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 

7.  PRINCIPLES AND EXPECTATIONS .................................................................................. 4 

8.  ESTABLISH AN EFFECTIVE COMMERCIAL AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY TO 

ENABLE DELIVERY OF SUCCESSFUL REQUIREMENTS ............................................... 5 

9.  EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SECURITY SPECIFICATION ............................ 6 

10. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – DEVIATIONS FROM SPECIFIED 

REQUIREMENTS ................................................................................................................ 8 

11. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – COUNTERFEIT FRAUDULENT AND  SUSPECT 
ITEMS (CFSI) ...................................................................................................................... 9 

12. EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SUPPLY CHAIN OPERATIONAL   

EXPERIENCE (OPEX) ...................................................................................................... 11 

13. MAINTAINING AN INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY .......................................... 12 

14. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................. 14 

15. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 15 

 

 
1. 

 
 
 
 
 

© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 

 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 1). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 2). 

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance (CS&IA) documentation that helps them demonstrate 
ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The 
SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their 
assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  
This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s supply 
chain management arrangements.  It aims to provide general advice and guidance to 
ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out 
how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the detail, 
targets or methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have 
addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe 
this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate.  

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. 

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an 
important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation. 

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 3) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 4). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 2 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that ‘a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied’. The importance of issues 
relating to assurance activities are also recognised in the Nuclear Security 
Fundamentals, specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12  

h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues 
and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear 
security including cyber security at all times. 

A more detailed description of the elements is provided in Recommendations level 
guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 5). 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.1 – 
Procurement and Intelligent Customer Capability, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear 
Supply Chain Management.  The TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated 
guidance and policy documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 6) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises.  

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 7) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

6.1 

This TAG informs regulatory assessment of Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
arrangements and procurement activities for nuclear security related items or services. 
It establishes ONR’s expectations of the purchaser, as the organisation at the top of 
the Supply Chain. It considers the procurement of items or services in support of 
construction, manufacture, repair, replacement, modification of plant and equipment. 

6.2 

The level of ONR scrutiny is dependent on the security significance of the items or 
services being procured. This scrutiny might include confirmation of the adequacy of 
the supplier’s quality management arrangements and/or be part of the manufacturing 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 3 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

or construction inspection activities identified via the supplier’s quality planning 
arrangements. 

Regulatory Expectations 

6.3 

The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders will describe in the security plan how 
they achieve effective procurement for items or services for nuclear security and 
maintain an intelligent customer capability to support nuclear supply chain 
management arrangements. 

FSyP 4 - Nuclear Supply 
Chain Management 

Procurement and Intelligent 
Customer Capability 

SyDP 4.1 

Dutyholders should maintain an ‘Intelligent Customer’ capability for all work carried 
out on their behalf by suppliers that may impact upon nuclear security. 

 
In delivering this principle, dutyholders should: 

6.4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

maintain the capability to recognise work of nuclear security significance to 
ensure  it is subject to the appropriate procurement procedures 

utilise an effective procurement cycle for work with nuclear security 
significance 

establish an effective commercial strategy to enable the delivery of security 
plan requirements 

maintain an intelligent customer capability, which is applied to all work 
carried out on its behalf by suppliers that may impact upon nuclear security  

develop appropriate specifications, with appropriate stakeholder input, to 
support the procurement of items or services (including those relating to 
cyber security or information assurance) of nuclear security significance 

ensure appropriate arrangements are in place for all contracts involving 
security classified information or equipment including that considered SNI in 
accordance with FSyP 7 and its associated delivery principles  

PRINCIPLES AND EXPECTATIONS 

ONR’s expectations for the principles to be applied to the procurement of goods and 
services with nuclear security significance is summarised in Diagram 1 below. 

 
7. 

7.1 

 

Diagram 1 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 4 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

7.2 

8. 

8.1 

8.2 

The dutyholder should also ensure that suppliers protect all tender documentation, 
specifications and operational requirements in accordance with their security 
classification.   

ESTABLISH AN EFFECTIVE COMMERCIAL AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY TO 
ENABLE DELIVERY OF SUCCESSFUL REQUIREMENTS 

The purchaser’s commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy will influence all 
arrangements associated with the procurement of nuclear security related items or 
services. An effective strategy, deployed through the organisation’s business planning 
process should enable delivery of security plan requirements  

The purchaser should plan to ensure their commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy 
addresses current and future security plan requirements over the lifetime of the facility 
including the decommissioning phase. The arrangements should be subject to routine 
review as they could be impacted by multiple influences, for example:  

 

 

 

 

parent body organisation ownership; aggregation of contracts across 
multiple dutyholders or organisations under parent group ownership, 
performance issues 

changes in the Supply Chain; mergers, acquisitions, insolvency, capability 
and performance issues 

security of supply; business continuity issues, strategic/critical suppliers, 
globalisation of Supply Chains 

make/buy policy; outsourcing and in-house capability or supply  

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 5 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

 

drive to improve efficiency and competitiveness while enhancing quality and 
security performance 

8.3 

The purchaser’s commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy, policy and arrangements 
should be appropriately resourced and include measures to mitigate the risks of 
Supply Chain issues adversely impacting on the security plan. The arrangements 
should be subject to routine review as part of the organisation’s business planning 
processes to ensure they remain effective and are proportionate to mitigating the 
identified risks.  

Inspectors should consider: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Has the purchaser developed a commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy to 
address current and future security plan requirements? 

Does the purchaser have effective arrangements to manage their Supply 
Chain including a clear strategy and/or policy, and is organised to deliver 
with roles and responsibilities clearly defined?  

Does the purchaser have the organisational capabilities to manage supply 
chain delivery? 

Are the purchaser’s SCM arrangements subject to routine review to ensure 
they remain effective in addressing security plan requirements? 

Has the Supply Chain strategy been developed cognisant of the learning 
available from within the organisation, Supply Chain, nuclear and wider 
industry? 

Does the strategy encourage collaborative working with the Supply Chain, 
sharing common security aims, objectives and success criteria? 

Do the purchaser’s make/buy (i.e. outsourcing and in-house provision) 
arrangements effectively consider current and future security plan 
requirements as part of the decision making criteria? 

9. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SECURITY SPECIFICATION 

9.1 

9.2 

The purchaser should issue security specifications which adequately describe the 
items or services, meet the security plan/operational requirements and identify the 
associated level of quality assurance. 

Establishing an effective security specification is of key importance in the procurement 
cycle. An ineffective specification will mean that any contractor in the Supply Chain will 
find it difficult to deliver the purchaser’s requirements right first time, regardless of their 
own capabilities and processes.  The dutyholder should also have in place a process 
to ensure that the supplier is reliable and can provide the equipment or service in an 
acceptable timeframe.  

9.3 

Given the importance of the security specification, it is essential that those writing them 
are Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) to perform the task and their work is 
subject to the appropriate levels of verification, validation and approval commensurate 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 6 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

9.4 

9.5 

9.8 

9.9 

with the security significance of the item or service being procured. At the pre-contract 
stage, the purchaser should ensure that prospective suppliers fully understand that the 
items or services being procured are a principal means of ensuring and maintaining 
nuclear security.  

The specification should detail any applicable design codes and standards that fully 
describe the items or services to be procured together with other generic contractual 
requirements. This combination of requirements should identify appropriate levels of 
quality assurance requirements to be applied. These should include, where applicable, 
assessment, audit, quality planning, quality control, inspection, surveillance, testing, 
and release or handover of items and should fully detail the records package required 
to be supplied with the item or service.  

For items or services which are the principal means of ensuring nuclear security, 
additional assurance and inspection arrangements may be required, which go beyond 
basic compliance with established design codes and standards. ONR may wish to 
assess the technical specification used as the basis for procurement prior to the 
procurement action, taking into account any additional requirements.  

9.6 

Throughout the design process, appropriate assurance activities should be undertaken 
to ensure that the design meets the requirements of the purchaser and applicable 
codes or standards in addition to any regulatory expectations.  

9.7  Where technical specifications are prepared for nuclear security significant items or 

services by contractors on behalf of the purchaser, these should be reviewed by staff 
from the purchaser’s organisation who are competent to confirm that the specifications 
properly reflect the design intent, meet any design codes and standards and as such 
meet security plan requirements. This review should be carried out before contract 
placement.  

On receipt of the purchase order, the supplier should carry out a review of the contract 
documentation to ensure it can fulfil all the technical, procedural and commercial 
requirements of the contract. For complex and high capital value security equipment, 
discussions between the supplier (and sub-suppliers) and purchaser should normally 
have covered these aspects prior to contract placement. The supplier should advise 
the purchaser of any changes to its (or its sub-suppliers) ability to fulfil the contract as 
such changes arise.  

The purchaser should operate a change control process to ensure that any changes to 
specification, design or contract are properly controlled and authorised, and the 
implications for nuclear security and the manufacturing/delivery processes, including 
changes to documentation (particularly process quality related, e.g. quality plans), are 
fully considered prior to the implementation of the change. Where these changes 
impact on the security plan, it may require further assessment by ONR. 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

 

Do specifications reflect the design intent, design codes and standards, and 
meet security plan requirements?  

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 7 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Are specifications prepared by contractors reviewed by competent staff from 
the purchaser’s organisation?  

Are appropriate levels of quality assurance applied to the procurement of 
items or services significant to nuclear security?  

Do the purchaser’s specification and assurance arrangements address any 
specific regulatory requirements?  

Do suppliers fully understand that the items or services being procured are a 
means of ensuring and maintaining nuclear security, and their significance? 

Are variations to specification, design or contract properly conceived, 
communicated, implemented and assessed for nuclear security implications 
and authorised by SQEP staff? 

Do suppliers notify the purchaser of any proposed changes and that they are 
properly assessed and authorised by the purchaser? 

Are supplier documents (e.g. quality plans and manufacturing instructions) 
re-approved before a change is implemented?  

10. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – DEVIATIONS FROM SPECIFIED 
REQUIREMENTS 

10.1  The purchaser should ensure that suppliers identify and categorise any deviations from  

specified requirements, referring to the dutyholder’s Design Authority (DA – as defined 
in Security TAG 1.2) for assessment.  Where any deviations are made the purchaser 
should ensure that these do not affect the proposed security outcome. 

10.2  Non-conformances are unplanned deviations from the purchaser’s requirements and 
can be identified in a number of ways including inspection, audit or surveillance. They 
can occur at any level within the Supply Chain. Deviations can be associated with an 
item or service or be the result of the inadequate implementation of the approved 
process.  

10.3  The identification, reporting and resolution of deviations should not be seen as 

negative, but as an indication that the achievement of the purchaser’s requirements is 
of prime importance. The control of any deviation from the technical specification is 
fundamental to the achievement of quality and therefore the integrity of the item.  

10.4  All organisations within the Supply Chain should, as part of their quality management 
arrangements, operate consistent arrangements, overseen by the purchaser, for the 
categorisation and disposition of deviations.  

10.5  Purchasers at each level of the Supply Chain should ensure their suppliers have 
adequate arrangements for the identification, categorisation and management of 
deviations for items or services. These should include obtaining the approval of the 
purchaser, or dutyholder’s DA, for the deviation in the form of a concession or 
procedure for re-work. They should inform the ultimate purchaser and potentially ONR 
(via the purchaser at the head of the Supply Chain) for deviations that are significant to 
nuclear security.  

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 8 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

10.6  Technical Queries (TQs) are slightly different to a non-conformance. For the former, 

the supplier is asking a question for approval prior to doing the work and for the latter, 
the work has started and is found to be either outside the acceptance criteria for the 
product, or the process has not been implemented as approved. TQs are raised during 
the work planning stage and help inform or clarify the contract requirements. Once the 
purchaser agrees to a TQ that requires a change in the design or other process, then 
the purchaser should track the modification to completion with contract changes 
through formal change control being communicated to the supplier if applicable. The 
purchaser’s arrangements should ensure that both types of deviation from the 
originally specified requirements are appropriately controlled and documented.  

10.7  There should be an audit trail in work control documents for all approved deviations as 

well as systematic overarching deviation tracking logs that show the status of each 
deviation. Approved deviations should be used to update drawings to reflect ‘as built’ 
status to aid configuration control for future modifications.  

Inspectors should consider: 

 

 

 

Are deviations identified, characterised and formally sanctioned by 
competent persons with the appropriate delegated authority? 

Do suppliers bring all deviations of nuclear security significance to the 
attention of the purchaser, dutyholder’s DA and ONR if appropriate, via the 
purchaser at the head of the Supply Chain? 

Is there a demonstrable audit trail for all approved deviations from the work 
control document to logs showing the status of each deviation raised, 
approved, rejected or reworked with links to required document changes? 

11. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – COUNTERFEIT FRAUDULENT AND 
SUSPECT ITEMS (CFSI) 

11.1  The purchaser should have arrangements to mitigate the risks of Counterfeit, 

Fraudulent and Suspect Items (CFSI) entering their Supply Chain.  

11.2  There should be recognition throughout all levels of the Supply Chain that there are 

parties who might wish to substitute CFSI for genuine items or services for commercial 
gain or with malicious intent. All purchasers should be aware of the risks and hazards 
of CFSI entering the nuclear industry Supply Chain and understand their role in 
mitigating this risk.  

11.3  The purchaser or supplier should deploy appropriate mitigating measures to prevent 

CFSI impacting on their Supply Chain depending on the scale, complexity, any 
international involvement in and/or nuclear security application of their items or 
services.  

11.4  The following non-exhaustive list presents appropriate mitigation that should be 

deployed as part of a purchaser/supplier’s management system, to defend against 
CFSIs for high risk items or services:  

 

robust SCM and procurement process arrangements including effective 
Supply Chain oversight and assurance, including inspection and testing  

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 9 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

competent staff involved in the acquisition processes from specification of 
requirement through to inspection and receipt of items and services and 
review of associated records 

material or component traceability back to source supplier, including 
verification testing by third party specialist organisations for high risk items  

use of positive material identification and destructive testing methods during 
product inspection, testing and receipt and as part of assurance sampling of 
high risk proprietary items  

product samples of known precision and authenticity available for 
comparison with purchased items   

training and awareness within purchasing organisation SCM teams (i.e. 
Engineering, Procurement, Audit & Inspection), partners and suppliers. Staff 
should be aware of the risks of CFSI and be trained in mitigation and 
detection methods as appropriate  

processes and procedures to identify, investigate, record incidences of CFSI 
and share lessons learnt  

benchmarking with other purchasers  

liaison with Trading Standards and security agencies 

requirements clearly defined in contract terms and conditions  

the effective management of non-conforming items to prevent their re-entry 
into the Supply Chain as genuine items  

11.5  The purchaser should have arrangements in place to quarantine a suspect item or 

service. Further investigation will be required by the purchaser or supplier to confirm 
the item as conforming, non-conforming, counterfeit or fraudulent.  

11.6  Examples of counterfeit or fraudulent items or services should be shared within the 
purchaser and/or the dutyholder organisation, Supply Chain and wider industry as 
appropriate to support learning, prevent use and encourage remedial measures in 
other impacted facilities, but only when the purchaser has conducted sufficient 
investigation to confirm if the item is CFSI or not.  ONR should be informed of all 
examples of counterfeit or fraudulent items or services confirmed within the 
purchaser’s Supply Chain that impact on high risk items or services or relate to 
shortfalls in the purchaser’s SCM or procurement arrangements. 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

 

Does the purchaser have effective processes in place to prevent against 
CFSI entering their Supply Chain at any level? 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 10 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Is the purchaser employing positive material identification and effective 
testing methods during its assurance arrangements, including sample testing 
of proprietary high risk items?  

Are staff that are involved in the purchaser’s acquisition processes 
competent to perform their role, aware of the risks of CFSI and understand 
and comply with the organisation’s mitigation methods?  

Does the purchaser have appropriate arrangements in place to quarantine, 
investigate and disposition suspect items as conforming, non-conforming, 
counterfeit or fraudulent?  

Has the purchaser established arrangements to raise awareness of CFSI 
within their Supply Chain and is encouraging the open reporting of CFSI 
examples to maximise learning and mitigate risks?  

Can the purchaser provide examples of where they have identified CFSI and 
taken appropriate remedial measures including notification to the ONR and 
the sharing of learning through their Operational Experience (OPEX) 
arrangements?  

12. 

EFFECTIVE PROCUREMENT CYCLE – SUPPLY CHAIN OPERATIONAL 
EXPERIENCE (OPEX) 

12.1  The purchaser should have arrangements to capture and act on OPEX feedback from 

its Supply Chain and SCM activities, sharing learning as appropriate within the 
organisation, its Supply Chain and wider industry.  

12.2  The purchaser should have effective OPEX processes that capture and act upon cross 

discipline (e.g. engineering, commercial, quality, inspection and test, safety & security 
etc.) SCM issues associated with the sub-standard procurement of high-risk items or 
services from specification of requirements, sourcing of suppliers, oversight of delivery, 
inspection, test and installation or use.  

12.3  The purchaser should ensure relevant learning is captured and acted upon from their 

Supply Chain, related to the provision of high risk items and services. This could 
include incidences of CFSI in their Supply Chain tiers, sub-standard Supply Chain 
performance issues that could impact the purchaser at the top of the Supply Chain and 
factors that might influence future commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy. 

12.4  The purchaser should recognise that key suppliers (such as those providing niche 
products or construction contractors) in the nuclear industry could provide items or 
services to multiple dutyholders and as such, sub-standard performance from a key 
industry supplier could have an impact on the nuclear security related activities of 
multiple dutyholders. 

12.5  The purchaser’s OPEX processes should enable the wider sharing of relevant Supply 
Chain and SCM experience with other dutyholders and wider industry as appropriate. 
Arrangements should be in place to evaluate OPEX shared by other dutyholders, and 
wider related industry, for implications within the purchaser’s organisation and 
management system arrangements. 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 11 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

12.6  ONR should be informed of confirmed instances of sub-standard Supply Chain 

performance in the provision of high-risk items or services, particularly where the 
supplier is likely to form part of the Supply Chains of other dutyholders or future 
dutyholders.  

Inspectors should consider 

 

 

 

 

 

Is the purchaser’s OPEX process established, capturing and acting upon 
sub-standard performance issues associated with their SCM arrangements?  

Is the purchaser’s OPEX process capturing and acting upon issues 
occurring within their different Supply Chain tiers?  

Are OPEX arrangements generating improvements in the purchaser’s SCM 
arrangements and influencing commercial and/or Supply Chain strategy?  

Does the purchaser evaluate relevant learning from other dutyholders, 
purchasers and supplier organisations, nationally and internationally as 
appropriate?  

Does the purchaser share learning with its Supply Chain and wider industry 
as appropriate?  

13.  MAINTAINING AN INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER CAPABILITY 

13.1  The concept of intelligent customer (IC) for safety is defined by the IAEA as follows: 

‘As an intelligent customer, in the context of nuclear safety, the management of 
the facility should know what is required, should fully understand the need for a 
contractor's services, should specify requirements, should supervise the work 
and should technically review the output before, during and after implementation. 
The concept of intelligent customer relates to the attributes of an organisation 
rather than the capabilities of individual post holders’. 

  

This equally applies to nuclear security and a dutyholder’s intelligent customer 
capability for security will be a subset of its core capability. 

13.2  The primary responsibility for the security of a nuclear premises rests with the 

dutyholder. The dutyholder should be able to demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the 
plant design and security plan for all plant and operations on the site. The dutyholder 
must be in control of activities on its site, understand the hazards associated with its 
activities and how to control them, and have sufficient competent resource within its 
organisation to act as an ‘Intelligent Customer’ for any work it commissions externally.  

13.3 

In the context of effective SCM the dutyholder should maintain an ‘Intelligent 
Customer’ capability to know what is needed, to fully understand the need for a 
contractor’s services, at any level of the Supply Chain, specify requirements, supervise 
work and technically review the output before, during and after implementation.  

13.4  ONR’s regulatory expectations of a dutyholder’s arrangements for the use of 

contractors, for retaining control of nuclear security and for discharging its other duties 
are summarised as follows. The dutyholder should:  

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 12 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

have sufficient  SQEP in-house staff to ensure effective control and 
management for nuclear security 

retain overall responsibility for, and control and oversight of, nuclear security 
and security of all of its business, including work carried out on its behalf by 
contractors 

ensure choices between sourcing work in-house or from contractors is 
informed by a company policy that takes into account the nuclear security 
implications of the selection 

maintain an Intelligent Customer capability for all work carried out on its 
behalf by contractors that may impact upon nuclear security;  

ensure that it only lets contracts for work with nuclear security significance to 
contractors with suitable competence, security standards, management 
systems, culture and resources  

ensure that all contractor staff are familiar with the nuclear security 
implications of their work and interact in a well-coordinated manner with its 
own staff 

ensure that contractors’ work is carried out to the necessary level of security 
and quality in practice 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Inspectors should consider: 

Does the dutyholder retain and maintain the core capability to understand, 
specify, oversee and accept nuclear security related work undertaken on its 
behalf by contractors at any level of the Supply Chain?  

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 13 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

14. 

REFERENCES 

Security Assessment Principles  

1.  
 
2. 
 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5.  

 
6. 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. 

 
7. 
 
 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management 
System. 
 

 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 14 of 15 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

15. 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

Counterfeit, Fraudulent and Suspect Items 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

Cyber Security and Information Assurance 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Intelligent Customer 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation 

Operational Experience 

Operational Requirement 

Supply Chain 

Supply Chain Management 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Security Assessment Principles 

Security Delivery Principle

Technical Assessment Guide 

Technical Query 

CFSI 

CPPNM 

CS&IA 

FSyP 

IAEA 

IC 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

OPEX 

OR 

SC 

SCM 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SyAPs 

SyDP 

TAG 

TQ 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

OFFICIAL  

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.1 
TRIM Ref: 2017/104195 

Page 15 of 15 

cns-tast-gd-5.1.pdf
 Title of document OFFICIAL ONR GUIDE RELIABILITY AND RESILIENCE OF THE SECURITY SYSTEM Document Type: Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide Unique Document ID and Revision No: CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 Revision 0 Date Issued: March 2017 Review Date: March 2020 Approved by: David Pascoe Professional Lead Record Reference: TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19075. (2017/100306) Revision commentary: New document issued TABLE OF CONTENTS 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LEGISLATION .................................................................................... 2 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 4 7. ELEMENTS OF SYSTEM RESILIENCE ............................................................................. 4 8. SUITABLY QUALIFIED AND EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL ............................................. 7 9. ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND THE SECURITY SYSTEM .................................................. 7 10. REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 9 11. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................ 10 © Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details. Published 03/17 OFFICIAL Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 Page 1 of 10 Office for Nuclear Regulation 1. INTRODUCTION OFFICIAL 1.1 1.2 2.1 3.1 3.2 The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 7). This document contains Fundamental Security Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 1). The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security and Information Assurance documentation that helps them demonstrate ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions. This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s arrangements to ensure their security systems have appropriate levels of reliability and resilience. It aims to provide general advice and guidance to ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements. It does not prescribe the methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate. 3. RELATIONSHIP TO LEGISLATION The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies are required to protect SNI. ONR considers reliability, resilience and sustainability to be important components of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance with relevant legislation. 4. RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 4.1 The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 4) and the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 3). Further guidance is available within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 4.2 Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that a quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 2 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all activities important to physical protection are satisfied. The importance of issues relating to quality assurance is also recognised in the Nuclear Security Fundamentals, specifically:  Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12 A nuclear security regime ensures that each competent authority and authorised person and other organisations with nuclear security responsibilities contribute to the sustainability of the regime by: o o o Allocating sufficient human, financial and technical resources to carry out the organisation’s nuclear security responsibilities on a continuing basis using a risk-informed approach Routinely conducting maintenance, training and evaluation to ensure the effectiveness of the nuclear security systems Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear security, including cyber security, at all times 4.3 5.1 5.2 A more detailed description of the quality assurance is provided in Recommendations level guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5) (Reference 2). This document states “The quality assurance policy and programme(s) for physical protection should ensure that a physical protection system is designed, implemented, operated and maintained in a condition capable of effectively responding to the threat assessment or design basis threat and that it meets the State’s regulations, including its prescriptive and/or performance based requirements.” 5. RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements. This TAG provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 5.1 – Reliability and Resilience, in support of FSyP 5 – Reliability, Resilience and Sustainability. The TAG is consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 5) describes the Cabinet Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on and off nuclear premises. 5.3 The Classification Policy (Reference 6) indicates those categories of SNI, which require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 OFFICIAL Page 3 of 10 Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 6. ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 It is particularly important to ensure, so far as possible, that the security system is capable of performing its function with an adequate level of reliability. This objective may be achieved by the adoption of a number of different provisions, together with the use of techniques to demonstrate the adequacy of the specified measures. The reliability of plant and systems to provide the security effect should be demonstrated by the dutyholder to be consistent with the risks associated with the loss of this capability. This should be informed by the Category of the security function and the Classification of the security structure, system or component (SSC) concerned. The security system design should incorporate an appropriate level of redundancy to reduce the effects of random failure, and diversity and segregation to reduce the effects of common cause failure and malicious actions. This should take account of the site or facility the system is protecting and its vulnerability to threats described in the Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions document (Reference 8). In assessing the fitness for purpose of the security system, and particularly the ability to deliver a particular effect, a number of issues relating to redundancy and diverse provisions should be considered. Security plans should clearly identify the security function of all SSCs so that this assessment can be carried out. Regulatory Expectation There is a regulatory expectation that dutyholders demonstrate in the security plan how they ensure that the design and operation of the security system delivers appropriate levels of redundancy, diversity and segregation. Dutyholders should provide sufficient resources (including personnel) to inform the design, to maintain and to restore nuclear security SSCs, thus building resilience to enable an appropriate and effective incident response, and a recovery programme that reflects the risk of any loss of service. Essential services critical to the correct functioning of the security system should be given the same priority as the system itself and as such are required to have appropriate levels of reliability and resilience. FSYP 4 - Reliability, Resilience and Sustainability Reliability and Resilience SyDP 5.1 Security structures, systems and components should be appropriately qualified, with design incorporating reliability and resilience through ‘failsecure’, redundancy, diversity and segregation. There should also be sufficient resources available and contingency arrangements developed to ensure continuity of security provision. 7. ELEMENTS OF SYSTEM RESILIENCE Redundancy 7.1 Redundancy is frequently defined as the provision of more than the minimum number of equipment items required to perform a specific security function. Such redundancy allows a specified security function to be delivered when one or more items (but not all) Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 4 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 7.2 7.3 are unavailable, due to a variety of unspecified potential failure mechanisms or maintenance (e.g. identified faults or hazards). Experience dictates there are deterministic and probabilistic arguments to justify the provision of redundancy in SSCs. A design which is considered acceptable will display adequate levels of system redundancy to ensure it is fit for purpose and should perform the required security function. These characteristics will include final provisions to satisfy the deterministic and probabilistic requirements of any potential design for SSCs important to security. Dependent Failure A possible threat to security system resilience is that posed by dependent failure. These have the potential to prevent the performance of a required security function through simultaneous loss of redundant provisions. Particular illustrations of this type of failure are common-cause failures (CCF).The inspector should be satisfied that the risk from dependent failures has been reduced to a level which is acceptable within the limits set by design requirements. It is important to note that reliability does not necessarily increase indefinitely in proportion to levels of redundancy, and this is primarily due to common origin or common cause effects. This type of failure is often referred to either as CCF or a common mode failure (CMF). A CCF is a dependent failure event where approximately simultaneous multiple failures result from a single shared cause (e.g. fire). A CMF is a common cause event where the multiple equipment items fail in the same mode. 7.4 Multiple failures can occur due to common weaknesses or dependencies shared by components. Such failures can cause failure of all redundant components in a single security system or failure of components in more than one system. Dependent failures can considerably reduce the reliability of the security systems relative to that expected of random failures acting isolation. 7.5 The main types of dependencies which could cause potential loss of a security function are described below.     Functional dependencies, which arise from shared or common functional features; such as a common electrical power source, common wiring or a shared communication node. Spatial dependencies, which arise from physical features shared by components located in a common location; such as common radiation or chemical conditions, a common environment and common support structures, and vulnerability to leaks of dangerous fluids (high temperature, corrosive or toxic). Inherent dependencies, which arise from shared characteristics; such as a common principle of operation or technical feature such as electrical overload. Human error related dependencies, which arise from human errors affecting some shared or common human process; such as human error in design or manufacture, or operating staff error during operation and maintenance. Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 5 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL 7.6 To provide protection against dependent failures, the inspector should seek confirmation that the dutyholder has identified and, where necessary and practicable, implemented measures in design, construction and operation to eliminate them or reduce their potential effect. Examples of such measures are:     the provision of segregation to eliminate spatial dependencies; the avoidance of functional dependencies by segregation of SSCs important to security and their support services; the provision of alternative and independent equipment to eliminate undue reliance on any single system. The purpose of this element of the approach is to provide protection against any 'hidden failure dependencies' that may not be identified; and approaches and procedures should be implemented to minimise the possibility of failure dependencies arising during design, manufacture, construction and operation, including dependencies due to operator and other human error. Diversity 7.7 Where a component of the security system is at potential risk from common cause failures, one means of reducing the susceptibility is to employ diverse provisions in separate redundant trains or systems. For example, the detect function over a given area could be delivered by both fixed-line and pan-tilt-zoom closed circuit television powered by segregated electricity supplies and a dual perimeter intruder detection system utilising complementary technologies (for example infrared and microphonic technologies). A dutyholder should consider appropriate measures to include diversity within the components of the system which is designed to deliver an individual effect and/or across the security systems in its entirety. Engineering diversity is defined as the provision of dissimilar means of achieving the same objective; e.g. the use of features which differ in the physical means of achieving a specific objective or use of different equipment made by different manufacturers. 7.8 7.9 7.10 Diversity provides one means of protection against some dependent failure mechanisms, by removing common features which may lead to failure dependencies. Diversity particularly provides protection against inherent dependencies and human error related dependencies. The possibility of the physical co-location or the functional support of diverse systems leading to dependencies which defeat the objective of providing diversity, should be addressed in the layout and functional design of the security system where appropriate. Segregation In a resilient security system and despite diverse provisions, the threat of common cause failures from hazards such as fire or hostile intent may be reduced by system segregation. This is the separation of components by distance or physical barriers, a particular example being provision of principal fire barriers to delineate individual fire zones; they may also serve as barriers to other hazards such as blast. Appropriate levels of segregation should be present in a dutyholder’s provisions in order to Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 6 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL maximise the likelihood that a security function will be performed, despite the occurrence of faults and hazards, possibly in combination. 7.11 Equipment segregation is the separation of redundant and/or diverse components by distance or by barriers in order to prevent all (or sufficient to enable system failure) of the components being damaged, particularly in the event of common hazards or malicious action. Segregation is provided in the design to ensure internal hazards, such as fire and certain external threats do not damage separate chains of security equipment to the extent that its functional reliability is unacceptably reduced. The most straightforward manner in which segregation can be achieved is through distance and avoidance of co-locating components. System Independence 7.12 Security systems may be subject to spurious operation in addition to operational failures. These can arise because a given security system component does not possess a sufficient level of independence from other separate systems. Measures need to be employed by the dutyholder to ensure that, wherever possible, security system components are not adversely affected by the spurious operation or failure of other systems, especially through any potential for hidden dependency (for example, by having a single system responsible for fire and security response). This is best achieved by designing in both functional and physical isolation. 8. SUITABLY QUALIFIED AND EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL 8.1 The dutyholder’s security organisation should possess adequate Suitably Qualified and Experienced (SQEP) personnel to support security systems. This includes having sufficient personnel with the necessary competences and knowledge to provide resilience and maintain the capability to manage, operate, maintain and repair security systems at all times. 9. ESSENTIAL SERVICES AND THE SECURITY SYSTEM Where essential services (such as computer based security systems) are necessary to support the functioning of a Physical Protection System (PPS), then these services should be sufficiently resilient and secure to ensure that their loss or interruption does not adversely affect the ability of the PPS to achieve the required outcome as defined in SyAPs Annexes C and D. Inspectors should consider:  Has reliability, resilience and sustainability been considered throughout the design stage for any new facility or security system and incorporated within relevant operational requirements?  Are requirements for security systems regularly reassessed in conjunction with all stakeholders?  Are there sufficient SQEP and other resources to manage, operate, maintain and repair the security system?  Does the design and operation of the security system display appropriate levels of redundancy, diversity and segregation? Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 7 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation OFFICIAL  Do essential services (such as power) necessary for the correct functioning of the security system have the appropriate levels of security, reliability and resilience?  Have potential dependencies and/or vulnerabilities of the security system been identified and mitigated?  Do security systems ‘fail secure’ and if they do not, are security requirements appropriately balanced against safety requirements and are adequate compensatory security measures available?  Does the dutyholder demonstrate the ability to learn from experience of maintaining the security system?  Is there a process of continuous improvement in place in relation to the security system’s reliability, resilience and sustainability?  Are appropriate quality performance and assurance mechanisms applied to security systems?  Is the response to the failure or loss of part of or all of a SSC regularly exercised or rehearsed? Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 8 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 10. REFERENCES OFFICIAL 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003. Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13. Nuclear Security Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 5). January 2011. www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf. IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20. Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s Nuclear Security Regime. http://www- pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/ Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036 Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions. Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management System. Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 9 of 10 OFFICIAL Office for Nuclear Regulation 11. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS OFFICIAL Business Continuity Common Cause Failure Common Mode Failure BC CCF CMF CPNI CPPNM FSyP IAEA NIMCA NISR NSS ONR PPS SNI SPF SQEP SSC SyAP SyDP TAG Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material Fundamental Security Principle International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Industries Malicious Capabilities Planning Assumptions Nuclear Industries Security Regulations Nuclear Security Series Office for Nuclear Regulation Physical Protection System Sensitive Nuclear Information Security Policy Framework Suitably Qualified and Experienced Structure, System and Component Security Assessment Principle Security Delivery Principle Technical Assessment Guide Report CNS-TAST-GD-5.1 TRIM Ref: 2017/100306 Page 10 of 10 OFFICIAL cns-tast-gd-4.2.pdf
 Title of document 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICIAL 

ONR GUIDE 

SUPPLIER CAPABILITY 

Document Type: 

Nuclear Security Technical Assessment Guide 

Unique Document ID and 
Revision No: 

CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 Revision 0 

Date Issued: 

March 2017 

Review Date: 

March 2020 

Approved by: 

David Pascoe 

Professional Lead 

Record Reference: 

TRIM Folder 4.4.2.19074. (2017/106056) 

Revision commentary: 

New document issued 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. 2 

2.  PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..................................................................................................... 2 

3.  RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION ................................................................ 2 

4.  RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE ...................................... 2 

5.  RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS ................................................... 3 

6.  ADVICE TO INSPECTORS ................................................................................................. 3 

7.  SUPPLY CHAIN ORGANISATION AND TECHNICAL CAPABILITY .................................. 4 

8.  SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ..................................................................... 5 

9.  REFERENCES .................................................................................................................... 8 

10. GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................. 9 

 

 
1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

© Office for Nuclear Regulation, 2017 
If you wish to reuse this information visit www.onr.org.uk/copyright for details.  
Published 03/17 

OFFICIAL 

 

 

Template Ref: ONR-DOC-TEMP-002 Revision 3 

Page 1 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

1. 

INTRODUCTION 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

1.1 

1.2 

2.1 

3.1 

3.2 

The Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) has established a set of Security Assessment 
Principles (SyAPs) (Reference 1). This document contains Fundamental Security 
Principles (FSyPs) that dutyholders must demonstrate have been fully taken into 
account in developing their security arrangements to meet relevant legal obligations. 
The security regime for meeting these principles is described in security plans 
prepared by the dutyholders, which are approved by ONR under the Nuclear Industries 
Security Regulations (NISR) 2003 (Reference 2). 

The term ‘security plan’ is used to cover all dutyholder submissions such as nuclear 
site security plans, temporary security plans and transport security statements. NISR 
Regulation 22 dutyholders may also use the SyAPs as the basis for Cyber Security 
and Information Assurance (CS&IA) documentation that helps them demonstrate 
ongoing legal compliance for the protection of Sensitive Nuclear Information (SNI). The 
SyAPs are supported by a suite of guides to assist ONR inspectors in their 
assessment and inspection work, and in making regulatory judgements and decisions.  
This Technical Assessment Guidance (TAG) is such a guide. 

2. 

PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

This TAG contains guidance to advise and inform ONR inspectors in exercising their 
regulatory judgment during assessment activities relating to a dutyholder’s supply 
chain management arrangements.  It aims to provide general advice and guidance to 
ONR inspectors on how this aspect of security should be assessed. It does not set out 
how ONR regulates the dutyholder’s arrangements.  It does not prescribe the detail, 
targets or methodologies for dutyholders to follow in demonstrating they have 
addressed the SyAPs. It is the dutyholder’s responsibility to determine and describe 
this detail and for ONR to assess whether the arrangements are adequate.   

3. 

RELATIONSHIP TO RELEVANT LEGISLATION 

The term ‘dutyholder’ mentioned throughout this guide is used to define ‘responsible 
persons’ on civil nuclear licensed sites and other nuclear premises subject to security 
regulation, a ‘developer’ carrying out work on a nuclear construction site and approved 
carriers, as defined in NISR. It is also used to refer to those holding SNI. 

NISR defines a ‘nuclear premises’ and requires ‘the responsible person’ as defined to 
have an approved security plan in accordance with Regulation 4. It further defines 
approved carriers and requires them to have an approved Transport Security 
Statement in accordance with Regulation 16. Persons to whom Regulation 22 applies 
are required to protect SNI. ONR considers supply chain management to be an 
important component of a dutyholder’s arrangements in demonstrating compliance 
with relevant legislation. 

4. 

RELATIONSHIP TO IAEA DOCUMENTATION AND GUIDANCE 

4.1 

The essential elements of a national nuclear security regime are set out in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) (Reference 3) and 
the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals (Reference 4). Further guidance is available 
within IAEA Technical Guidance and Implementing Guides. 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 2 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

4.3 

5.1 

5.2 

4.2 

Fundamental Principle J of the CPPNM refers to quality assurance and states that ‘a 
quality assurance policy and quality assurance programmes should be established and 
implemented with a view to providing confidence that specified requirements for all 
activities important to physical protection are satisfied’. The importance of issues 
relating to assurance activities are also recognised in the Nuclear Security 
Fundamentals, specifically: 

 

Essential Element 12: Sustaining a Nuclear Security Regime – 3.12  

h) Routinely performing assurance activities to identify and address issues 
and factors that may affect the capacity to provide adequate nuclear 
security including cyber security at all times. 

A more detailed description of the elements is provided in Recommendations level 
guidance, specifically Nuclear Security Series (NSS) 13, Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5) (Reference 5). 

5. 

RELATIONSHIP TO NATIONAL POLICY DOCUMENTS 

The SyAPs provide ONR inspectors with a framework for making consistent regulatory 
judgements on the effectiveness of a dutyholder’s security arrangements.  This TAG 
provides guidance to ONR inspectors when assessing a dutyholder’s submission 
demonstrating they have effective processes in place to achieve SyDP 4.2 – Supplier 
Capability, in support of FSyP 4 – Nuclear Supply Chain Management.  The TAG is 
consistent with other TAGs and associated guidance and policy documentation. 

The HMG Security Policy Framework (SPF) (Reference 6) describes the Cabinet 
Secretary’s expectations of how HMG organisations and third parties handling HMG 
information and other assets will apply protective security to ensure HMG can function 
effectively, efficiently and securely. The security outcomes and requirements detailed 
in the SPF have been incorporated within the SyAPs. This ensures that dutyholders 
are presented with a coherent set of expectations for the protection of nuclear 
premises, SNI and the employment of appropriate personnel security controls both on 
and off nuclear premises. 

5.3 

The Classification Policy (Reference 7) indicates those categories of SNI, which 
require protection and the level of security classification to be applied. 

6. 

ADVICE TO INSPECTORS 

6.1 

This TAG informs regulatory assessment of Supply Chain Management (SCM) 
arrangements with a particular focus on the supplier’s capability. It should be read 
together with the Safety TAG NS-TAST-GD 049 Rev 5 ‘Licensee Core and Intelligent 
Customer Capabilities’.  That TAG defines key terms: ‘core capability’, ‘contractor’ and 
‘intelligent customer’.   The TAG also relates the use of contractors to several Licence 
Conditions.   

Regulatory Expectations 

6.2 

The regulatory expectation is that dutyholders will describe in the security plan how 
they seek assurance of supplier capability to support effective nuclear supply chain 
management arrangements. 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 3 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

6.3 

6.4 

7.1 

7.2 

7.3 

FSyP 4 - Nuclear Supply 
Chain Management 

Supplier Capability 

SyDP 4.2 

For work with nuclear security significance, dutyholders should evaluate and confirm that 
suppliers have the organisational and technical capability, capacity and culture to deliver 
items or services to the specification prior to placing any contract. 

 
The regulatory expectation from dutyholders is that they will evaluate and confirm 
suppliers have the organisational and technical capability, capacity and culture to 
deliver items or services to the specification prior to placing any contract for items or 
services identified as being of nuclear security significance. This expectation is in 
addition to the normal personnel security screening necessary for any contractor to 
gain access to a site or operation.  That process aims to counter the ‘insider threat’ 
and CPNI has produced a number of good practice guides on how this might be 
mitigated, with specific reference to contractors.    

The regulatory expectation from dutyholders is that they will ensure suppliers have 
quality management arrangements which are appropriate and consistent with the 
security significance of the procured items or services. In most cases dutyholders will 
use established contractors with a good track record.  Such contractors are likely to 
have the appropriate accreditations and associations.  For example: Security Industry 
Association’s Approved Contractor Scheme, BS EN ISO 9001 Quality Management 
Systems, membership of the Security Institute and related codes of practice and British 
Standards.   

For work with nuclear security significance, the purchaser should evaluate and confirm 
that suppliers have the organisational and technical capability, capacity and culture to 
deliver items or services to specification, prior to placing any contract.  

Suppliers should be selected by the purchaser after evaluation against pre-defined 
criteria appropriate to the contract. The criteria will test the supplier’s ability to meet the 
specified intent and should include information from the supplier that provides objective 
evidence of their capability and capacity to deliver the required item or service. The 
criteria for selection should be appropriately weighted to evaluate the supplier’s ability 
to meet the required security performance (e.g. protection of SNI) of the contract. 

Purchasers are expected to ensure that the supply chain has the organisational and 
technical capability to deliver items or services in line with their requirements. 
Suppliers’ organisational arrangements should include documented management 
system arrangements appropriate to the items or services being supplied. These 
systems should be implemented and be able to meet the requirements of any relevant 
national or international management system standard for quality, environment and 
security management. An evaluation of a potential supplier should include the potential 
supplier’s nuclear security culture, ensuring that the organisation and its leaders 
understand, or have the potential to understand, the importance of nuclear security 
and the contribution of any high-risk item or service they may supply to achieving the 
purchaser’s security plan requirements. 

7. 

SUPPLY CHAIN ORGANISATION AND TECHNICAL CAPABILITY 

7.4 

As part of the supplier selection process, the purchaser should confirm that suppliers 
have adequate oversight and assurance arrangements for their own suppliers. The 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 4 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

purchaser and suppliers should hold certification in accordance with recognised 
management system requirements, issued by the UK Accreditation Service (UKAS), or 
international equivalent, to ensure that appropriate quality management arrangements 
are in place and are being applied throughout the Supply Chain. This approach should 
not preclude purchasers from directly evaluating any level of the Supply Chain or 
carrying out oversight and assurance when work is in progress. All contracts should 
detail this right of access by the purchaser. 

7.5 

Purchasers should assure themselves that suppliers have competent personnel, 
particularly those carrying out key functions such as contract review, fabrication and 
inspection. The judgement on competency should be based on qualifications, training 
and experience using the supplier organisation’s own criteria and any applicable 
design code requirements for selection, employment and training of employees. A 
responsible person within the supplier organisation should assess each person 
involved for SQEPness against the post profiles and record acceptance and/or 
limitations, identifying how the latter will be addressed.   

Inspectors should consider: 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

Is the purchaser’s process for evaluating suppliers of security significant 
items and services appropriately weighted to consider the quality and 
security requirements as a key part of the contract selection and award 
criteria? 

Do suppliers of security significant items and services currently have, and 
can maintain, sufficient SQEP personnel throughout the contract period? 

Does the supplier have the capacity to provide an enduring source of high-
risk items or services throughout the contract period?  

Has the purchasing organisation promulgated the required nuclear security 
culture with key suppliers? 

Do suppliers of security significant items or services understand the role of 
their products in achieving the dutyholder’s security plan requirements and 
are well-coordinated with the purchasers’ staff? 

Does the purchasing organisation and/or its suppliers monitor the 
performance of key individuals who are responsible for providing security 
significant high-risk items or services?  

8. 

SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

The purchaser should ensure that suppliers have quality management arrangements 
appropriate and consistent with the security significance of the procured items or 
services. 

Purchasers should ensure that supply organisations have management system 
arrangements appropriate to the items or services being supplied. These systems 
should be implemented and be able to meet relevant national or international; quality, 
environment and security management system requirements and be certified by UKAS 
or an equivalent international organisation. 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 5 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

 

8.1 

8.2 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

8.3 

8.4 

8.5 

8.6 

8.7 

8.8 

8.9 

The purchaser’s management system arrangements should ensure that effective SCM, 
procurement, oversight and assurance arrangements are applied and are 
proportionate to the nuclear security significance of the items or services being 
procured. Arrangements should include comprehensive measures for the generation 
and control of quality plans and records, detailed further below, as key requirements in 
the effective procurement, manufacture and/or delivery of high-risk items and services. 

Quality Plans 

The purchaser should make clear in the contract the extent to which quality plans will 
be utilised. Quality Plans should be agreed with the purchaser prior to their use. The 
use of quality plans, developed by the supplier and agreed with the purchaser, is 
essential to ensure that items are fabricated, manufactured, erected, tested and 
inspected in a planned and controlled manner, and that the required levels of integrity 
are achieved and can be demonstrated within the required record/evidence package. 

Quality Plans allow the purchaser to check in advance that the supplier has fully 
understood the detailed requirements of the technical specification, and that the 
supplier has the necessary assurance activities to deliver items that will meet the 
technical specification and applicable codes and standards. Quality Plans also allow 
the purchaser, second party (supplier), independent third party inspection personnel, 
and, in some instances, ONR, to insert inspection points, witness points, review points 
or hold points into the manufacturing sequence. 

Quality Plans should include the full sequence of steps to deliver the item or service 
and details of hold point release. These need to be available for review by involved 
parties before work commences and in sufficient time to allow these parties to review 
and annotate them with hold, inspection, witness and review points and/or to question 
the sequence or referenced documents. 

Quality Plans, in identifying the sequence of activities required to satisfy the 
requirements of the contract, should reference process or fabrication instructions, 
tests, inspections and clearly identify the records required to be generated and 
provided to the purchaser. They should enable each stage of work to be signed for as 
being complete and also on the completion of work covered by each element of the 
plan. Proposed changes to quality plans before and during work commencement 
should be formally controlled and agreed by all the inspecting parties. 

A completed Quality Plan should demonstrate that all appropriate steps have been 
taken to deliver items or services to purchaser requirements, including details of the 
organisations involved and references to control documents and appropriate records.  

For complex items that are fabricated, manufactured or erected in stages, there may 
be several Quality Plans which support a top level quality plan. Quality Plan operations 
which are carried out by different organisations should make reference to the 
arrangements for releasing items or services from one to the other and the quality 
plans that control the ongoing work.  

8.10  A quality plan should identify or reference all those documents which form the 

purchaser’s document package and include such aspects as qualification of personnel, 
fabrication procedures, material certification and traceability, consumable specification, 
concessions and rework, manufacture, fabrication instructions, heat treatment records, 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 6 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

inspection and test results (including those from the purchaser, second, and third party 
inspection organisations). 

8.11  Quality Plans should identify steps for release, transport, handover and the process 

that will control the interfaces between organisations. The release process to the 
purchaser from the supplier should identify and record any approved deviations from 
contract requirements, specified intent and any outstanding actions. 

Records 

8.12  The importance of identification and retention of design, procurement, manufacturing, 

fabrication and inspection records cannot be overstated as these ultimately support the 
security plan. These should provide the evidence of assurance activities including 
those carried out by the supplier and sub-suppliers and in some cases the purchaser. 
Records also provide ONR with evidence of the application of assurance 
arrangements and can be used to demonstrate compliance. 

8.13  Records form part of the demonstration that structures, systems and components meet 

the design intent and nuclear security requirements. The identification, generation, 
timely completion, handover and retention of records associated with the supply of 
items or services, should form part of the contractual arrangements between purchaser 
and supplier at all levels of the Supply Chain.  

8.14  The purchaser should identify all the records required to be delivered to the purchaser 
during or on completion of the contract. Particular attention should be given to material 
traceability and inspection, test and surveillance activities. 

8.15  Tracking of record packages by unique reference and plant item unique numbers will 

aid interim and full system sign off prior to pre and post commissioning testing. The 
purchaser should develop the lifetime record package tracking process and ensure the 
supplier’s contract arrangements identify this process and their role within that 
process. 

Inspectors should consider:  

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Are the supplier’s management system arrangements appropriate to the 
risks of the items of services being supplied?  

Are Quality Plans comprehensive and inclusive of the full sequence of steps 
required to deliver the item or service, including references to assurance 
activities and applicable codes and standards? 

Do Quality Plans identify inspection/witness/review and hold points for all the 
required inspection parties? 

Are Quality Plans being adhered to and are they fully signed off after each 
step has been completed? 

Has the Purchaser put adequate contractual arrangements in place to 
ensure that relevant records are identified and provided by the Supply Chain 
in the correct form and to the required timescale?  

 

 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 7 of 9 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

9. 

1.  
 
2. 
 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5.  

 
 
6. 

REFERENCES 

Security Assessment Principles – Trim Ref. 2017/121036   

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 2003.  Statutory Instrument 2003 No. 403 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
https://ola.iaea.org/ola/treaties/documents/FullText.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 20.  Objective and Essential Elements of a State’s 
Nuclear Security Regime. http://www-
pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1590_web.pdf 

IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13.  Nuclear Security Recommendations on 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Revision 
5).  January 2011.  www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1481_web.pdf 

HMG Security Policy Framework. Cabinet Office.  
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/316182/
Security_Policy_Framework_-_web_-_April_2014.pdf 

NISR 2003 Classification Policy – Trim Ref. 2012/243357. 

 
7. 
 
 
Note: ONR staff should access the above internal ONR references via the How2 Business Management 
System. 
 
 

 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 8 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

Office for Nuclear Regulation  
 
 

OFFICIAL  

 
 

10. 

GLOSSARY AND ABBREVIATIONS 

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 

CPPNM 

CS&IA 

FSyP 

IAEA 

NISR 

NSS 

ONR 

OR 

SC 

SCM 

SNI 

SPF 

SQEP 

SyAPs 

SyDP 

TAG 

UKAS 

 
 
 

Cyber Security and Information Assurance 

Fundamental Security Principle 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Nuclear Industries Security Regulations 

Nuclear Security Series 

Office for Nuclear Regulation

Operational Requirement 

Supply Chain 

Supply Chain Management 

Sensitive Nuclear Information 

Security Policy Framework 

Suitably Qualified and Experienced 

Security Assessment Principles 

Security Delivery Principle 

Technical Assessment Guide 

United Kingdom Accreditation Service 

Report CNS-TAST-GD-4.2 
TRIM Ref: 2017/106056 

Page 9 of 9 

OFFICIAL  

 

 
 

